THEY ARE FOUR OF THE
MOST COMMON
PLANTS WE KNOW.
WE'VE ALWAYS THOUGHT
THAT WE CONTROLLED THEM.
BUT WHAT IF, IN FACT,
THEY HAVE BEEN SHAPING US?
Man: WE DON'T GIVE NEARLY
ENOUGH CREDIT TO PLANTS.
THEY'VE BEEN WORKING ON US,
THEY'VE BEEN USING US,
FOR THEIR OWN PURPOSES.
Narrator: FOUR PLANTS THAT HAVE
TRAVELED THE ROAD TO SUCCESS,
BY SATISFYING HUMAN DESIRES.
Man: THE TULIP,
BY GRATIFYING OUR DESIRE FOR
A CERTAIN KIND OF BEAUTY,
HAS GOTTEN US
TO TAKE IT FROM ITS
ORIGINS IN CENTRAL ASIA
AND DISPERSE IT
AROUND THE WORLD.
MARIJUANA, BY GRATIFYING OUR
DESIRE TO CHANGE CONSCIOUSNESS,
HAS GOTTEN PEOPLE
TO RISK THEIR LIVES,
THEIR FREEDOM, IN ORDER TO
GROW MORE OF IT AND
PLANT MORE OF IT.
THE POTATO -- BY GRATIFYING
OUR DESIRE FOR CONTROL,
CONTROL OVER NATURE, SO
THAT WE CAN FEED OURSELVES,
HAS GOTTEN ITSELF
OUT OF SOUTH AMERICA
AND EXPANDED ITS RANGE
FAR BEYOND WHERE IT
WAS 500 YEARS AGO.
AND THE APPLE,
BY GRATIFYING OUR
DESIRE FOR SWEETNESS --
BEGINS IN THE
FORESTS OF KAZAKHSTAN
AND IS NOW THE UNIVERSAL FRUIT.
THESE ARE GREAT WINNERS
IN THE DANCE OF DOMESTICATION.
NarTHE WAY YOU'VE
NEVERURE SEEN IT BEFORE,
WITH BEST-SELLING
AUTHOR MICHAEL POLLAN.
Man: AND THIS RELATIONSHIP
OF THE PLANTS,
LEARNING HOW TO
GRATIFY OUR DESIRES,
AND OUR WORKING FOR THEM
IN EXCHANGE FOR THIS,
IS WHAT I CALL THE
BOTANY OF DESIRE.
IS PROVIDED BY THE NATIONAL
SCIENCE FOUNDATION,
WHERE DISCOVERIES BEGIN.
ADDITIONAL FUNDING
IS PROVIDED BY
THE ALFRED P.
SLOAN FOUNDATION,
TO ENHANCE PUBLIC UNDERSTANDING
OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
IN THE MODERN WORLD.
AND BY THE COLUMBIA
FOUNDATION, SAN FRANCISCO,
WHICH SUPPORTS THE TRANSITION
TO SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES.
AND BY CONTRIBUTIONS
TO YOUR LOCAL STATION
BY VIEWERS LIKE YOU.
Man: IT WAS THAT VERY
SPECIAL WEEK IN MAY,
WHEN THE APPLE TREES ARE
IN SPECTACULAR BLOOM,
AND THEY'RE JUST VIBRATING
WITH THE ATTENTION OF BEES.
AND I WAS PLANTING POTATOES,
MAKING MY LITTLE ROWS,
AND PUTTING IN MY CHUNKS,
AND THE BEES WERE
WORKING ABOVE ME.
AND IT OCCURRED TO ME --
YOU KNOW, WHAT DID I HAVE
IN COMMON WITH THOSE BEES?
AND WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT IT,
QUITE A BIT.
THE BEE ASSUMES
IT'S GETTING THE
BEST OF THIS DEAL
WITH THE APPLE BLOSSOM.
IT'S BREAKING IN,
IT'S GETTING THE NECTAR.
AND HAS NO IDEA THAT IT'S
PICKED UP THIS POLLEN
ON THETO ANOTHER TREEHIGHS
AND IS TRANSPORTING IT
IN THE GARDEN OR
DOWN THE STREET,
OR ANYWHERE ELSE.
SO FOR THE BEE TO THINK IT'S
IN CHARGE OF THIS RELATIONSHIP
IS REALLY JUST A FAILURE
OF BEE IMAGINATION.
AND I REALIZED I HAD THE
SAME FAILURE OF IMAGINATION.
I WAS WORKING FOR THESE
POTATOES IN SOME SENSE.
I WAS PLANTING THEM,
I WAS GIVING THEM
A LITTLE BIT MORE HABITAT
THAN THEY HAD BEFORE.
AND YET I THOUGHT I WAS
KIND OF CALLING THE SHOTS.
SO THAT'S WHEN I
HAD THIS THOUGHT
THAT, WOULDN'T
IT BE INTERESTING
TO LOOK AT OUR RELATIONSHIP
TO DOMESTICATED PLANTS
FROM THE PLANT'S POINT OF VIEW?
OF COURSE, PLANTS DON'T HAVE
CONSCIOUSNESS OR INTENTION,
BUT THE ACT OF USING
OUR CONSCIOUSNESS
TO PUT OURSELVES
IN THEIR ROOTS,
OR SHOES, OR WHATEVER,
HELPS US TO SEE THINGS
FROM THEIR VANTAGE POINT.
AND WHEN YOU DO THAT,
NATURE SUDDENLY
LOOKS VERY DIFFERENT.
WE REALIZE WE'RE IN
THE WEB OF NATURE,
NOT STANDING OUTSIDE IT.
IN WHICH WE CAN SEE OURSELVES
IN A SLIGHTLY DIFFERENT WAY.
AND AS MUCH AS THIS IS
A STORY ABOUT PLANTS,
IT'S A STORY ABOUT HUMAN DESIRE.
GOOD MORNING, MY
NAME IS BRIAN,
WELCOME TO POVERTY
LANE ORCHARDS.
FIRSTINTO THE ORCHARD,A
DO IS WE'RE GONNA HEAD UP
I WANNA TELL YOU A LITTLE
BIT ABOUT THE APPLES,
AND THE TREES, AND
HOW TO PICK APPLES.
McDormand: FOR CHILDREN
IN NEW ENGLAND,
AN APPLE PICKING EXPEDITION
TO THE LOCAL ORCHARD.
Brian: OKAY, WHEN YOU GUYS
ARE PICKING THE APPLES,
YOU WANT TO PICK OUT
NICE RIPE APPLES.
AND THE WAY TO TELL THE
RIPE ONES IS THEY'RE RED.
McDormand: BUT THESE
CHILDREN MIGHT NEVER HAVE
HAD A CHANCE TO TASTE APPLES
HAD THE APPLE NOT FOUND A WAY
TO GET US TO DO ITS BIDDING.
THOUSANDS OF YEARS AGO, THE
APPLE PUT US TO WORK --
TRANSPORTING ITS GENES
FROM ITS NATIVE
GROUND IN CENTRAL ASIA
TO THE FAR CORNERS OF THE EARTH.
Pollan: FOR A
PLANT TO DO THAT,
IT HAS TO BE AWFULLY
ENTERPRISING, WILLING TO ADAPT
TO A GREAT MANY
DIFFERENT ENVIRONMENTS,
WILLFORMS AND FLAVORS.WITH
A GREAT MANY DIFFERENT
IS THERE A REALLY GOOD RED ONE
UP THERE? WHAT DO YOU SEE?
Pollan: TODAY,
IT'S A FRUIT ICONIC
AND BELOVED AND USED IN A
GREAT MANY DIFFERENT WAYS.
McDormand: BUT THE APPLE HAS
NOT ALWAYS BEEN REGARDED AS
THE WHOLESOME FRUIT
WE THINK OF TODAY.
Pollan: THE APPLE TREE
WAS THE GREAT EVIL PLANT,
BECAUSE PEOPLE TOOK THESE
APPLES AND MADE HARD CIDER,
WHICH WAS THE MAIN
SOURCE OF ALCOHOL
IN RURAL AMERICA FOR
MANY, MANY YEARS.
THE STRATEGY -- THE
EVOLUTIONARY STRATEGY
THAT GOT IT FROM
THERE TO HERE --
INVOLVED PRODUCING
EVER MORE SWEETNESS.
Woman: OKAY, HERE'S CUP FOUR.
THERE YOU GO.
IF YOU THINK IT
TASTES BAD OR YUCKY,
I WANT YOU TO GIVE IT
TO OSCAR THE GROUCH.
OSCAR, OKAY.
SO HERE'S CUP TWO.
AND IF TASTES GOOD, I WANT
YOU TO GIVE IT TO BIG BIRD,
BECAUSE HE LIKES
THINGS THAT TASTE GOOD.
McDormand: THESE CHILDREN
ARE DOING TASTE TESTS --
PART OF RESEARCH BEING
DONE ON SWEETNESS
AT THE MONELL CHEMICAL SENSES
CENTER IN PHILADELPHIA.
IT SPECIALIZES IN THE
STUDY OF TASTE AND SMELL.
GOOD JOB! YOU'RE DOING GREAT.
ALL RIGHT, SO I'M GOING
TO GIVE YOU ANOTHER ONE.
Man: SOME OF THE FUNDAMENTAL
THINGS WE'VE DISCOVERED ARE,
THE DESIRE FOR SWEETNESS IS
HARDWIRED IN HUMAN BEINGS.
IT'S BUILT-IN, IT'S INNATE.
IT'S NOT BECAUSE WE FEED BABIES
HIGH LEVELS OF SWEET
WHEN THEY'RE YOUNG,
IT'S PART OF THEIR BIOLOGY.
PRESUMABLY, OUR RESPONSE
TO SWEET EVOLVED
WHEN SWEET THINGS WERE
RARE IN THE ENVIRONMENT,
THEY WERE THERE
IN SMALL AMOUNTS,
AND OUR BIGGEST PROBLEM
WAS TO MAKE SURE
WE GOT ENOUGH CALORIES AND
DIDN'T STARVE TO DEATH.
IF A PLANT WAS SWEET,
THAT MEANT IT WASN'T
BITTER AND POISON,
IT MEANT IT WAS REASONABLY
HIGH IN CALORIES,
BECAUSE SUGARS
ARE CALORIE-RICH,
AND SO SWEETNESS IS THE SIGNAL
FOR SOMETHING
THAT'S GOOD FOR US.
Pollan: SWEETNESS IN NATURE
IS VERY RARE, VERY SPECIAL --
IT'S REALLY LIMITED
TO RIPE FRUIT,
AND HONEY, IF YOU'RE
WILLING TO RISK
GOING INTO A BEEHIVE.
AND APPLES ARE A
PARTICULARLY BIG, PORTABLE,
LONG-LASTING VESSEL
FOR SWEETNESS.
McDormand: IT WAS HERE IN
THE ANCIENT FORESTS
OF CENTRAL ASIA
THAT OUR OWN
PURSUIT OF SWEETNESS
FIRST BROUGHT US INTO
CONTACT WITH THE APPLE.
THIS, SCIENTISTS SAY,
IS THE APPLE'S GENETIC HOME --
THE PLACE WHERE IT ORIGINATED.
THESE HIGH FORESTS IN WHAT IS
NOW THE NATION OF KAZAKHSTAN
GAVE RISE TO THOUSANDS
OF DIFFERENT VARIETIES,
MANY OF WHICH STILL
GROW HERE TODAY.
Man: YOU LAND IN ALMATY,
THE CAPITAL OF KAZAKHSTAN,
AND THERE ARE APPLE SEEDLINGS
PUSHING UP THROUGH
THE BROKEN PAVEMENT.
YOU GO UP INTO THE HILLS,
AND THERE ARE THOUSANDS OF
DIFFERENT KINDS OF APPLES.
GREAT BIG RED APPLES
THAT LOOK LIKE
LARGE MacINTOSH --
AND YOU'D FIND THESE SORT OF
KNOTTY LITTLE GREEN THINGS
THAT EVEN A RAT WOULDN'T EAT.
Pollan: TO SEE THESE WILD
APPLES IN ALL THEIR DIVERSITY
IS TO REALIZE THAT, IN THESE
FORESTS, THIS IS, YOU KNOW,
THESE ARE GOD'S FIRST DRAFTS
OF WHAT AN APPLE COULD BE.
McDormand: ONE WAY THE APPLE
COULD SECURE ITS FUTURE
WAS BY EXPANDING ITS HABITAT --
BUT THAT'S A HARD THING
TO DO IF YOU'RE A PLANT.
Pollan: YOU KNOW,
THE APPLE HAS THE SAME
EXISTENTIAL PREDICAMENT
OF ANY PLANT -- IT'S STUCK
IN PLACE, IT'S ROOTED DOWN.
SO YOU HAD THE APPLE
BEGINNING ITS LIFE
IN THESE KAZAKH FORESTS
IN CENTRAL ASIA,
BUT THEY WOULD BE STUCK THERE
IF NOT FOR MAMMALS, THAT
THEY EVOLVED TO APPEAL TO.
IF YOU'RE A BEAR IN A
FOREST AND YOU'RE HUNGRY,
YOU DON'T PICK THE LITTLE
BLUEBERRY SIZED APPLES,
YOU PICK THE BIGGEST
ONES YOU CAN GET.
IF YOU FIND A
PARTICULARLY SWEET ONE,
YOU'RE GOING TO EAT
MORE OF THAT ONE
THAN A SOUR ONE.
THEY EAT THE WHOLE APPLE
AND EXCRETE THE SEEDS,
AND THAT'S HOW APPLES
SPREAD THEIR GENES.
AND SWEETNESS WAS THE
TICKET OUT OF THAT FOREST.
McDormand: BUT TO MOVE FARTHER
THAN BEARS COULD TAKE IT,
THE APPLE WOULD
NEED A NEW ALLY --
AND FOUND ONE...IN US.
Pollan: PART OF
THE APPLE'S GENIUS
HAS BEEN TO INSINUATE
ITSELF INTO OUR CULTURE,
AND ART AND RELIGION, AS WELL.
IT'S KIND OF A
BOTANICAL ZELIG --
I MEAN, IT JUST KIND
OF SHOWS UP EVERYWHERE.
EVEN WHEN IT WASN'T
REALLY THERE.
McDormand: ONE OF
THE BEST KNOWN IMAGES
OF PEOPLE AND APPLES TOGETHER
COMES FROM THE STORY
OF THE GARDEN OF EDEN.
Pollan: THOUGH THE
BIBLE DOESN'T SPECIFY
WHAT THE FRUIT IS,
WE HAVE ALWAYS IMAGINED
IT TO BE APPLES.
AND THAT'S BECAUSE THE
NORTHERN RENAISSANCE PAINTERS,
WHEN THEY THOUGHT OF A FRUIT,
A DESIRABLE FRUIT THAT YOU
WOULD PUT IN A GARDEN,
THEY IMMEDIATELY
THOUGHT APPLE.
BUT IT WASN'T AN APPLE.
PROBABLY WAS A POMEGRANATE,
BECAUSE APPLES
DON'T DO VERY WELL
IN THE LANDS WHERE THE BIBLE IS
THOUGHT TO HAVE TAKEN PLACE.
McDormand: ONE PLACE
WHERE APPLES DID GROW
WAS ANCIENT CHINA.
THEY'D BEEN BROUGHT
THERE FROM CENTRAL ASIA
ON THE TRADE ROUTE
CALLED THE SILK ROAD.
THE APPLE ALSO TRAVELED WEST,
REACHING EUROPE AND
EVENTUALLY THE NEW WORLD.
IN AMERICA, THE APPLE
FOUND A PARTNER,
SOMEONE WHOSE LOVE FOR IT WOULD
BECOME THE STUFF OF LEGEND --
JOHNNY APPLESEED.
[ MAN WHISTLING ]
THE LORD IS GOOD TO ME
AND SO I THANK THE LORD
Woman: BEHIND JOHNNY
APPLESEED THE MYTH,
THERE IS A REAL PERSON
-- JOHN CHAPMAN.
BUT THE MYTH IS SO POWERFUL,
SO COMPELLING, SO FASCINATING,
THAT IT HAS COMPLETELY OBSCURED
THE REAL PERSON WHO'S BEHIND IT.
McDormand: JOHN CHAPMAN WAS
BORN IN 1774 IN MASSACHUSETTS.
IN HIS EARLY 20s,
HE HEADED WEST.
HE TRAVELED THROUGH
THE OHIO RIVER VALLEY,
WHICH WAS THEN THE
AMERICAN FRONTIER,
PLANTING AND
SELLING APPLE TREES.
Pollan: HE IS SAID TO HAVE
LIKENED HIMSELF TO A BEE --
THAT HE HAD SOME SENSE
THAT HE, LIKE A BEE,
WAS SPREADING THESE
PLANTS AROUND.
Browning: JOHNNY
APPLESEED WAS --
NOT TO MAKE A TERRIBLE PUN --
A PRETTY SEEDY
FELLOW, YOU KNOW?
TRAVELLING AROUND,
OFTEN BAREFOOT,
YOU KNOW, IN A BURLAP
SACK SOMETIMES,
SLEEPING IN BARNS.
BUT TERRIBLY ENGAGING.
PEOPLE TOOK HIM IN,
AND HE PLANTED THE ORCHARDS,
AND HE TOLD THEM HOW TO PRUNE.
BUT HE WAS, UM...
HE WAS A BUM.
THIS IS DOUBLY ODD,
BECAUSE HE WAS ACTUALLY
FAIRLY WELL OFF.
McDormand: CHAPMAN COULD
EASILY HAVE AFFORDED
ALL THOSE APPLE TREES HE PLANTED
MADE HIM A PROSPEROUS MAN.
Pollan: HE WASN'T JUST
SPRINKLING APPLE
SEEDS WHERE HE WENT --
HE WAS A NURSERY MAN.
HE UNDERSTOOD THAT,
WHEREVER THE NEXT WAVE
OF SETTLERS WOULD LAND,
THEY WOULD WANT APPLE TREES.
BY LAW, YOU WERE REQUIRED
TO PLANT SOME FRUIT,
BECAUSE THAT WAS A SYMBOL
YOU WERE GOING TO STAY PUT.
SO HE WOULD FIND
A PIECE OF LAND,
HE WOULD CLEAR IT,
AND HE WOULD PLANT
APPLES FROM SEEDS,
AND START A NURSERY A FEW YEARS
BEFORE THE SETTLERS GOT THERE,
SO BY THE TIME THEY SHOWED UP,
HE HAD SAPLINGS FOR SALE
FOR A FEW CENTS APIECE.
IT WAS A VERY GOOD BUSINESS.
BUT WHEN I STARTED LEARNING
ABOUT THE BOTANY OF APPLES,
SUDDENLY THERE WAS A
PROBLEM WITH HIS STORY --
WHY WOULD HE BE
PLANTING THEM FROM SEED?
McDormand: THE MYSTERY
STEMS FROM A CURIOUS FACT
OF THE APPLE'S OWN BIOLOGY --
ITS TASTE AND EVEN
ITS APPEARANCE
ARE RARELY PASSED ON
THROUGH ITS SEEDS.
Pollan: IN EVERY APPLE YOU
WILL FIND A FEW LITTLE SEEDS,
EACH IN THEIR OWN
LITTLE CHAMBER.
WELL, EVERY ONE OF
THOSE SEEDS, IF PLANTED,
WILL PRODUCE A COMPLETELY
DIFFERENT APPLE,
LOOKING VERY LITTLE, IF
AT ALL, LIKE ITS PARENT.
THEY TEND TO BE SOUR, BITTER,
ALL THESE OTHER
DIFFERENT FLAVORS.
McDormand: THAT'S
BECAUSE EACH APPLE SEED
CARRIES GENES FOR A WIDE
VARIETY OF TRAITS --
AND THERE'S NO TELLING
WHICH OF THOSE GENES
WILL BE TURNED ON WHEN
THE SEED STARTS TO GROW.
THERE IS, HOWEVER,
A VERY SIMPLE WAY
TO PERPETUATE THE
TRAITS OF AN APPLE,
AN ANCIENT TECHNIQUE
CALLED GRAFTING.
YOU TATHAT YOU LIKEDA
TREE THAT PRODUCED FRUIT
AND INSERT IT INTO A
YOUNG, DEVELOPING TREE.
THE RESULT?
AN EXACT COPY --
OR CLONE -- OF THE
APPLE YOU STARTED WITH.
MANY AMERICAN SETTLERS GREW
THEIR APPLES EXACTLY THAT WAY.
BUT NOT JOHNNY APPLESEED.
Chaplin: HE TENDED
TO GROW SEEDLINGS
AND THEN JUST LET
THEM GROW WILD.
HE MIGHT HAVE DONE
THIS, WE THINK,
BECAUSE OF HIS
RELIGIOUS BELIEFS --
HE WAS A SWEDENBORGIAN.
McDormand: THE 18th-CENTURY
CHRISTIAN THEOLOGIAN,
PREACHED THAT THE NATURAL WORLD
IS IMBUED WITH GOD'S SPIRIT.
Chaplin: SWEDENBORG
HAD TAUGHT THAT
EVERYTHING THAT
WAS HERE ON EARTH,
THAT YOU COULD SEE,
FEEL, TASTE, TOUCH,
HAD A COUNTERPART IN THE
SPIRITUAL WORLD BEYOND.
FOR CHAPMAN, THIS
SEEMED TO INDICATE THAT
HE SHOULD NOT TAMPER WITH
ALL OF THE NATURAL THINGS
THAT HE COULD SEE IN
THE WORLD AROUND HIM.
AND THIS SEEMS TO
BE ONE REASON WHY
HE GROWS APPLES
FROM THEIR SEEDS,
McDormand: WHATEVER
HIS REASONS, CHAPMAN'S
BOTANICAL PRACTICES
GAVE THE APPLE A
GOLDEN OPPORTUNITY
TO ADAPT TO A NEW ENVIRONMENT.
Pollan: BY GOING BACK TO SEED,
YOU ARE GOING BACK TO THE
BIODIVERSITY OF YOUR GENES.
SO ALL OF THOSE APPLE SEEDS
PRODUCED HUNDREDS OF
DIFFERENT KINDS OF APPLES
WITH VERY DIFFERENT QUALITIES.
AND SO THE APPLE,
JUST LIKE THE ENGLISHMEN
WHO CAME OVER,
REMADE ITSELF AS AMERICANS.
McDormand: MOST OF
THESE NEW VARIETIES,
BECAUSE THEY WERE
GROWN FROM SEED,
TUUSE FOR THEM -- CIDER... BUT
THE SETTLERS HAD A VERY GOOD
HARD CIDER.
Pollan: NOW, WHEN WE
USE THE WORD CIDER,
WE PICTURE SOMETHING VERY SWEET.
BUT OF COURSE, IT
ONLY STAYS SWEET
WENT INTO BARRELS AND FERMENTED
SO ALL THE CIDER THEY MADE
AND BECAME WHAT WE CALL HARD
CIDER, ALCOHOLIC CIDER.
SO JOHNNY APPLESEED,
WHO WE THINK OF AS
THE MOST BENIGN, WHOLESOME
KIND OF CHARACTER,
TURNS OUT WAS
BRINGING HARD DRINK
TO THE FRONTIER.
Browning: THAT'S
WHAT PEOPLE DRANK.
COLONIAL AMERICA WAS
TERRIFIED OF WATER!
YOU KNOW, THEY KNEW ABOUT
ALL THE DISEASES
OF WATER IN EUROPE,
Chaplin: CIDER, HOWEVER,
BECAUSE IT HAD BEEN FERMENTED,
HAD KILLED, IN THE PROCESS,
ANYTHING THAT
MIGHT MAKE YOU ILL.
Pollan: THAT WAS THE BEER OF
ITS TIME, THE WINE OF ITS TIME,
THAT'S WHAT EVERYBODY DRANK
-- AND I MEAN EVERYBODY.
McDormand: EVERYONE FROM PAUPERS
TO PRESIDENTS CONSUMED CIDER.
JOHN ADAMS LIKED TO
DRINK IT FOR BREAKFAST.
BUT OVER TIME,
CIDER AND THE APPLE
BECAME VICTIMS OF
THEIR OWN SUCCESS.
Chaplin: ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION
STARTED TO RISE IN
ABOUT THE 1830s.
AND THERE'S SOME PUBLIC
OUTRAGE OVER THAT,
THAT PEOPLE SEEMED TO BE
TOO INTERESTED IN DRINKING,
OR ARE DRUNK,
SO ALL FORMS OF
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE
BEGIN TO BE CRITICIZED,
AND CIDER IS AMONG THEM.
Pollan: PEOPLE WENT
AFTER APPLE TREES.
WHICH HAD BEEN CELEBRATED FOR
MUCH OF AMERICAN HISTORY,
IS VILIFIED AS THE EVIL FRUIT.
IT'S BACK IN THE GARDEN
OF EDEN, IN A SENSE.
THE HATCHET WIELDED BY
THE FAMOUS PROHIBITIONIST
CARRIE NATION,
WAS NOT JUST ABOUT
BREAKING DOWN SALOON DOORS,
IT WAS ALSO ABOUT CHOPPING
DOWN THIS EVIL TREE
THAT WAS GETTING
AMERICANS DRUNK.
McDormand: BUT THE APPLE
WOULD BE RESCUED FROM INFAMY
BY THE SWEETER
SIDE OF ITS NATURE.
Pollan: EVEN THOUGH CIDER WAS
WHAT HAPPENED TO MOST APPLES,
APPLES WERE ALSO
EATEN AS A FOOD.
AND WHENEVER YOU WERE LUCKY
ENOUGH TO FIND A SWEET ONE,
THAT'S WHAT YOU DID WITH IT.
McDormand: SO WITH
CIDER IN DISREPUTE,
THE RACE TO FIND SWEET NEW
VARIETIES INTENSIFIED.
Pollan: EVERYONE WHO HAD A
CIDER ORCHARD HAD HIS EYE OUT
FOR THAT ONE GOOD EDIBLE APPLE.
IT WAS REALLY WELL UNDERSTOOD
THAT ONE OF THE TICKETS
TO GREAT SUCCESS AND
GREAT WEALTH IN AMERICA
WAS TO FIND A GOOD EDIBLE APPLE.
AND ALL THE FAMOUS
APPLES THAT WE KNOW --
THE DELICIOUS, THE MacINTOSH,
THE BALDWIN, THE
NORTHERN SPY --
THESE HAD ALL BEGUN
IN CIDER ORCHARDS.
THEY WERE THE STARS.
BEFORE 1900, THE FATE OF, LIKE,
99% OF APPLES WAS TO BE DRUNK.
AFTER 1900, IT BECOMES THE
FRUIT THAT WE NOW KNOW.
McDormand: FOR
20th-CENTURY AMERICANS,
APPLES BECAME A SYMBOL
OF WHOLESOMENESS.
Pollan: THE APPLE GROWERS
CAME UP WITH THIS CAMPAIGN --
AN APPLE A DAY KEEPS
THE DOCTOR AWAY --
AND ESSENTIALLY REBRANDED
THE APPLE AS A HEALTH FOOD.
THAT'S ALL WELL AND GOOD,
BUT WHEATING APPLES,
THAT, AS SOON AS YOU'RE
YOU FOCUS ON THOSE FEW VARIETIES
THAT ARE REALLY
TASTY AND POPULAR,
AND THE INDUSTRY SHRANK
DOWN THE NUMBER OF APPLES
OVER THE COURSE OF
THE 20th CENTURY.
SO THAT, BY THE TIME I WAS
A BOY IN THE EARLY '60s,
THERE WERE VERY FEW
APPLES IN COMMERCE.
THERE WAS THE RED DELICIOUS,
THE GOLDEN DELICIOUS,
AND THE MacINTOSH.
THAT WAS, YOU KNOW,
EASY FOR MARKETERS TO
GET THEIR HEAD AROUND,
IT WAS ALL THE PUBLIC
SEEMED TO WANT.
BUT FOR THE APPLE, IT
WASN'T VERY GOOD NEWS --
BECAUSE AS SOON AS YOU KIND
OF FREEZE ITS EVOLUTION,
THE APPLE IS KIND OF A
SITTING DUCK FOR ITS PESTS.
McDormand: APPLES WERE
INCREASINGLY BEING GROWN
IN WHAT SCIENTISTS
CALL MONOCULTURES,
WHICH CHURNED OUT
JUST A SINGLE VARIETY.
Pollan: ONCE YOU RELY ON
THE GENETIC UNIFORMITY
THAT COMES WITH CLONING
RATHER THAN
PLANTING FROM SEED,
YOU RESTRICT THE SPECIES'
NATURAL ABILITY TO EVOLVE.
SO YOU HAVE YOUR PLANTS, WITH
THEIR GENETIC COMBINATION,
STAYING STILL,
WHILE THE PESTS --
I'M TALKING ABOUT
INSECTS OR DISEASES,
VIRUSES OR BACTERIA --
ARE ALWAYS TRYING
TO PICK THE LOCK.
THEY WILL BE ABLE TO GET NOT
JUST ONE OF YOUR PLANTS,
BUT ALL OF YOUR PLANTS,
'CAUSE THEY'RE THE SAME.
McDormand: TO DEFEND THEM
FROM INSECTS AND DISEASES,
MOST APPLES ARE ROUTINELY
SPRAYED WITH CHEMICALS.
Browning: THE BUGS ARE CLEARLY
WELL AHEAD OF THE
HUMAN CONTROLS.
IF YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT A LARGE GROWER,
WITH A COUPLE OF
HUNDRED ACRES,
A HALF-MILLION TO THREE-QUARTERS
OF A MILLION DOLLARS A YEAR
IN CHEMICAL COSTS.
Pollan: ONE OF THE BIGGEST
CONSUMERS OF PESTICIDE NOW
IS THE APPLE CROP.
IT'S THE FATE OF MONOCULTURES.
Man: WE'LL HAVE TO
CHECK THE RECORDS
TO SEE WHAT THE
RESISTANCES ARE IN THESE,
BECAUSE THESE COULD
BE REAL USEFUL
IN BREEDING RIGHT
NOW, I THINK.
McDormand: IN GENEVA, NEW YORK,
SCIENTIST HERB ALDWINCKLE
AND PHIL FORSLINE
ARE LOOKING FOR
ANOTHER WAY TO HELP THE APPLE --
BY HARNESSING THE DEFENSES
THAT LIE HIDDEN IN ITS GENES.
SO THINK WHAT IT WOULD BE LIKE
IF IT WAS GRAFTED ON
A DWARFING ROOTSTOCK.
PROBABLY DOUBLE THE SIZE
AND EVEN MORE COLOR.
McDormand: ALDWINCKLE
AND FORSLINE
COLLABORATE AT THIS
APPLE RESEARCH CENTER,
WHICH IS RUN BY THE U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE.
IT'S A BOTANICAL
VERSION OF NOAH'S ARK.
Pollan: TO WALK INTO
THIS ORCHARD IS TO --
AT FIRST, IT LOOKS LIKE
KIND OF A NORMAL ORCHARD...
AND THEN YOU REALIZE AS
YOU LOOK DOWN THE ROWS
THAT, MY GOD, EVERY ONE OF
THESE TREES IS DIFFERENT.
THERE ARE YELLOW ONES
AND THERE ARE RED ONES,
AND THERE ARE GREEN ONES,
AND THERE ARE PURPLISH ONES,
AND THERE ARE SMALL AND LARGE
AND EVERY SHAPE
OF TREE AND FRUIT.
IT IS JUST THIS VAST LIBRARY.
McDormand: HERE, THERE ARE MORE
THAN 5,000 DIFFERENT KINDS
OF APPLE TREES -- EACH WITH
ITS OWN DISTINCT SET OF GENES.
Man: A MECHANIC HAS A
WIDE VARIETY OF TOOLS
WHICH HE HOPES
HE'LL BE ABLE TO USE
TO FIX PROBLEMS WITH
MACHINES HE'S WORKING ON --
IT'S A SIMILAR
SITUATION WITH APPLES.
WE NEED TO HAVE A TOOL CHEST,
AND THE GENES ARE WHAT
PROVIDE THE TOOL CHEST.
McDormand: IN 1989,
ALDWINCKLE AND FORSLINE
GOT AN UNEXPECTED OPPORTUNITY
TO ADD TO THEIR TOOL CHEST
SOME OF THE MOST VALUABLE
APPLE GENES IN THE WORLD --
THE GENES FROM KAZAKHSTAN.
Aldwinckle: WE REGARD
THE KAZAKH APPLE FORESTS
AS THE GENE BANK OF
THE DOMESTIC APPLE.
WILD FORESTS WERE
BEING CHOPPED DOWN,
THE TREES WERE
BEING DESTROYED,
THEY JUST WOULDN'T
BE THERE ANYMORE
UNLESS SOMEONE WENT
THERE AND COLLECTED THEM
AND GREW THEM SOMEWHERE ELSE.
WE HAD SOME JEEPS WE
TRAVELED AROUND IN,
AND SO WE WERE ABLE TO
VISIT TRUE APPLE FORESTS.
Forsline: IT WAS A
BIT OF A CULTURE SHOCK
TO BE IN CENTRAL ASIA
FOR THE FIRST TIME.
MY FIRST IMPRESSIONS
WERE, THIS WAS IN
THE MIDDLE OF NOWHERE
-- WHAT AM I DOING HERE?
BUT, UH... TO JUST SEE
THE DIVERSITY IN THOSE APPLES
IS JUST AMAZING.
Aldwinckle: ONCE AN APPLE
TREE IS CHOPPED DOWN,
BUT IF WE CAN TAKE THE
SEED FROM THAT TREE
WE CAN PRESERVE THE GENES THAT
WERE PRESENT IN THAT TREE,
AND ESSENTIALLY WE CAN
PRESERVE THAT TREE FOREVER.
McDormand: ALDWINCKLE
AND FORSLINE
MADE SEVERAL TRIPS TO
THE KAZAKH FORESTS.
THEY BROUGHT SEEDS
BACK AND PLANTED THEM.
Forsline: WE'RE STANDING IN
THE MIDDLE OF WHAT I CALL
KAZAKHSTAN RE-CREATED
IN GENEVA, NEW YORK.
BUT WE'RE NOT ONLY
JUST SAVING IT,
WE'RE DEVELOPING A
LIBRARY OF INFORMATION
ON EVERY ONE OF THESE TREES.
Browning: THE NOTION OF
CONSERVATION OF SEED
IS TO CONSERVE IT --
BECAUSE YOU DON'T KNOW
WHAT YOU MIGHT NEED IT
FOR AT SOME FUTURE TIME --
MAYBE NOTHING.
WELL, BECAUSE IT'S A GOOD
IDEA TO CONSERVE THINGS --
THAT'S THE PRIMARY VALUE.
THEN THERE'S A
SECONDARY VALUE,
AND THAT IS TO USE THEM
AS GENETIC BREEDING STOCK
TO SOLVE PROBLEMS --
TO SOLVE PROBLEMS THAT
MIGHT ENABLE GROWERS
TO USE FEWER PESTICIDES.
McDormand: IN HIS LAB,
ALDWINCKLE IS TRYING
TO DO JUST THAT,
BY MOVING GENES THAT
PROVIDE DISEASE RESISTANCE
FROM A WILD KAZAKH APPLE
INTO A COMMERCIAL VARIETY.
Aldwinckle: THESE ARE PIECES
OF LEAVES OF FUJI APPLE.
AND WHAT WE'VE GOT
HERE IS AN EXPERIMENT
TO TRY AND TRANSFER SOME GENES
FOR RESISTANCE TO APPLE SCAB
INTO FUJI, AND THEREFORE MAKE
FUJI RESISTANT TO APPLE SCAB.
Pollan: IN THE 19th CENTURY,
THE REPOSITORY OF ALL
THE GENETIC DIVERSITY
OF THE APPLE IN AMERICA
WAS IN THE CIDER ORCHARD.
TODAY IT'S IN THESE COLLECTIONS
THAT ARE MAINTAINED BY
SOME VISIONARY INDIVIDUALS
WHO UNDERSTAND THE IMPORTANCE OF
PRESERVING THIS BIODIVERSITY.
THERE'S A VICIOUS CIRCLE
THAT WE GET INTO, WHICH
IS, WE HAVE MONOCULTURES
IN THE FIELD, AND
MONOCULTURES ON THE PLATE.
MONOCULTURES OF TASTE.
FRUIT NOW HAS TO
COMPETE WITH SODA.
SO IT HAS GOT TO
BE SUPER-SWEET,
AND THE MODERN APPLES
ALL ARE VERY SWEET --
WE HAVE APPLES THAT, AS ONE
CRITIC SAID OF THE DELICIOUS,
IT HAS SWEETNESS
WITHOUT DIMENSION.
THE PROBLEM IS, IT'S BORING,
SWEETNESS -- IF
THAT'S ALL YOU GET.
McDormand: IN LEBANON,
NEW HAMPSHIRE,
ONE GROWER IS TRYING
TO SOLVE THAT PROBLEM
BY REACHING BACK INTO
THE APPLE'S PAST.
STEPHEN WOOD IS THE OWNER
OF POVERTY LANE ORCHARDS.
HE USED TO GROW MOSTLY
STANDARD VARIETIES,
LIKE MACTHE PRICESLANDS --
BUT FOUND HE COULDN'T MATCH
OF THE BIG COMMERCIAL GROWERS.
Wood: WE REALIZED
IN THE LATE '80s
THAT WHAANY LONGER,YS
DONE WASN'T GOING TO WORK
AND THAT WE EITHER HAD TO
CHANGE QUITE DRAMATICALLY
WHAT WE WERE DOING, OR STOP
GROWING APPLES ALTOGETHER.
McDormand: BUT FOR WOOD,
GIVING UP ON HIS ORCHARD
SEEMED INCONCEIVABLE.
YOU KNOW, SOME PEOPLE
ADORE ANTIQUE CLOCKS,
I ADORE APPLE TREES.
HOW ARE WE DOING ON WATER CORE?
WE STARTED SOME GRAFTING TRIALS
OF WHAT I GUESS YOU COULD
CALL ANTIQUE VARIETIES --
VARIETIES THAT ARE NOT
COMMONLY GROWN ANYMORE,
BUT ONCE WERE.
THIS IS WICKSON.
THIS APPLE ORIGINATED
IN THE PACIFIC NORTHWEST
IN THE LATE 19th CENTURY.
[ CRUNCH ]
IT'S GOT A BEAUTIFUL ACIDITY.
THIS IS POMME GRISE.
IT HAS VERY LOW
ACID, HIGH SUGAR,
AND A SORT OF... A
SORT OF NUTTY FLAVOR.
THIS APPLE IS CALVILLE
BLANC D'HIVER.
IT'S GOT A LITTLE BIT OF
SWEETNESS BEHIND THE ACID.
YOU LOOK AT 17th-CENTURY
FRENCH STILL-LIFES,
THIS IS THE APPLE YOU SEE
BESIDE THE DEAD PHEASANT
AND THE BOTTLE OF WINE.
THERE'S A HUGE NUMBER
OF APPLE VARIETIES --
IT'S ALMOST INFINITE.
McDormand: BUT IT'S
TOUGH TO MAKE A LIVING
SELLING ONLY ANTIQUE
EATING APPLES.
SO WOOD TURNED HIS ATTENTION TO
ANOTHER LOST CHAPTER
IN APPLE HISTORY --
MOST OF HIS ORCHARD IS
NOW PRODUCING APPLES...
FOR HARD CIDER.
Wood: IT IS A GAMBLE TO PLANT
ACRES AND ACRES OF
INEDIBLE APPLES...
MANY OF THE BEST CIDER
APPLES ARE DISGUSTING --
BITTHE DECISION TO PLANTS.
BUT THOUSANDS AND
THOUSANDS OF THOSE TREES,
COULD BE QUITE A GOOD JOKE IF
THE CIDER DOESN'T MAKE IT,
BECAUSE THESE APPLES
ARE NOT GOING TO WIND UP
THERE'S NO SECONDARY
MARKET FOR THIS STUFF.
[ POP ]
WITH A FEW OTHER
COLLEAGUES, WE ARE TRYING,
BASICALLY TO CREATE A CATEGORY
IN THE U.S. WINE TRADE
OF FINE CIDERS.
I THINK WE'RE DOING
QUITE WELL IN THAT,
BUT THE [ CRUNCH ]ILL OUT.
Pollan: THERE ARE
A LOT OF FRUITS
THAT HAVE GOTTEN AHEAD IN LIFE
BY BEING SWEET AND
GRATIFYING THE SWEET TOOTH
OF MAMMALS LIKE US,
BUT THERE'S SOMETHING
ABOUT THE APPLE,
YIN WESTERN CIVILIZATION,C
AND SO ENDURING IN
ITS RELATIONSHIP,
AND ITS ABILITY, REALLY, TO
GRATIFY OUR CHANGING DESIRES --
FOR ALCOHOL, AND FOR A
WONDERFULLY SWEET FOOD --
THAT MY GUESS IS, IT WILL
SUCCEED FOR MANY YEARS TO COME.
Pollan: THE MYSTERY IS,
WHY THINGS THAT BEES
REGARD AS BEAUTIFUL,
I MEAN, WHAT ARE THE ODDS THAT
WE WOULD HAVE THE SAME TASTE
AS THIS LITTLE BUG?
WHEN I SAY THE BEE HAS
A CONCEPT OF BEAUTY,
I MEAN, I'M BEING
METAPHORICAL.
BUT THE BEE AND OURSELVES
HAVE A LOT IN COMMON.
WE REALLY LIKE SYMMETRY,
WE LIKE CERTAIN PATTERNS
OF COLOR, AND CERTAIN SCENTS --
WE AGREE ABOUT SCENT, AS WELL.
THE BEE LOVES THIS FLOWER
AND MOVES TOWARD IT,
AND THIS FLOWER HAS
EVOLVED TO ATTRACT IT.
WELL, THIS PLANT HAS ALSO
EVOLVED TO ATTRACT US.
TO THE EXTENT THAT
A FLOWER CAN GRATIFY
OUR IDEAS OF A
BEAUTIFUL COLOR,
A BEAUTIFUL SHAPE,
A BEAUTIFUL SMELL,
IT WILL DOMINATE
THE LANDSCAPE,
DOMINATE THE FLOWER INDUSTRY,
GET MANY MORE COPIES
OF ITSELF MADE,
McDorOBSCURITY TO FAMEWERS
HAVE TRAVELED THE ROAD FROM
MORE SPECTACULARLY
THAN THE TULIP.
Man: 59 YEARS AGO,
I SAW FIRST TULIP IN MY LIFE.
AND THAT WAS IN THE
GARDEN OF MY FATHER.
AND NOW MY WHOLE
LIFE IS WITH TULIPS.
McDormand: NOBODY KNOWS TULIPS
BETTER THAN THE DUTCH --
AND FEW DUTCHMEN KNOW THEM
BETTER THAN JOOP ZONNEVELD,
BUT HE HAS A CURIOUS WAY OF
DESCRIBING THEIR EFFECT ON HIM.
Zonneveld: YOU LOOK AFTER
EVERY TULIP, STEP BY STEP,
YOU GET AND WORSE.FEVER --
IT BECOMES WORSE, WORSE,
FOR ME, IT WAS SOMETHING,
IT'S IN ME, IT NEVER STOPS.
McDormand: ZONNEVELD'S BEEN
A TULIP BUYER, A SALESMAN,
OF ONE OF THE MOST FAMOUS
TULIP GARDENS IN THE WORLD --
HORTUS BULBORUM IN
THE NETHERLANDS,
A SHOWPLACE FOR THE
REMARKABLE DIVERSITY
OF THIS SOMETIMES
UNDERAPPRECIATED FLOWER.
ZWE HAVE 2,300 VARIETIES.,
YOU HAVE DARK PURPLE COLORS,
YOU HAVE ALMOST BLACK TULIPS,
YOU HAVE LILY
FLOWERING TULIPS,
THERE'S A TULIP THAT
HAS THE SHAPE LIKE THIS,
LIKE A LILY FLOWER.
YOU HAVE YELLOW, RED,
PINK, ORANGE, BICOLORED,
SINGLE EARLIES, SINGLE
LATE, DOUBLE LATE --
SO THERE ARE SO MANY
THINGS IN THE TULIPS
THAT ONCE YOU START,
YOU DISCOVER EVERY DAY --
EVEN MYSELF, I DISCOVER
EVERY DAY NEW THINGS.
McDormand: TODAY,
ZONNEVELD IS GIVING A TOUR
TO PHOTOGRAPHER RUTH DUNDAS
AND WRITER JUSTIN SPRING --
TWO AMERICANS WHO HAVE
COME TO HORTUS TO GATHER
MATERIAL FOR A NEW BOOK.
THIS IS A LOVELY VIRIDIFLORA.
TULIPS ARE ABOUT THE LAST
SUBJECT THEY THOUGHT
WOULD EVER CAPTURE
THEIR INTEREST.
Dundas: I HAVE
TO SAY, HONESTLY,
THAT WHEN I FIRST
STARTED TO PHOTOGRAPH,
THE LAST THING I WANTED
TO PHOTOGRAPH WAS TULIPS.
IT'S PRETTY BORING,
IT'S A LOLLIPOP
ON TOP OF A STICK,
YOU KNOW, YOU GET DIFFERENT
COLORS, BUT THAT'S IT.
IT'S ONLY ONCE YOU
COME TO GARDENS
SUCH AS THE HORTUS BULBORUM HERE
THAT YOU START TO UNDERSTAND
THAT THIS IS A
VERY VARIED FLOWER,
AND IT'S ADAPTED AND MUTATED
INTO MTO PHOTOGRAPH,FORMS.
IT'S A LOT OF FUN
THAT THERE'S A
CONSTANT CHALLENGE
TO LOOK INTO THIS FLOWER
AND BE ABLE TO SEE
NEW COLOR, NEW LIGHT.
YOU CAN TAKE A BOUQUET OF TULIPS
AND PHOTOGRAPH IT
EVERY HOUR OF THE DAY.
AND IT'S SOMETHING QUITE
DIFFERENT EACH TIME.
[ SHUTTER CLICKS ]
PERFECT, GORGEOUS.
IT JUST SEEMS SO
AMAZING THAT YOU HAVE
THIS EXTRAORDINARY VARIETY
THAT'S BEEN CULTIVATED
OVER CENTURIES, AND
SOMEHOW YOU GREW UP
NOT KNOWING A THING ABOUT IT.
McDormand: FLOWERS BEGAN
FLAUNTING THEIR BEAUTY
LONG BEFORE THERE WERE PEOPLE.
IT WAS MORE THAN 100
MILLION YEARS AGO
WHEN THE CLASS OF PLANTS
THAT FLOWERS BELONG TO --
THE ANGIOSPERMS -- FIRST
APPEARED ON THE EARTH.
Pollan: THE GREAT REVOLUTION
IN NATURAL HISTORY
IS THE RISE OF THE ANGIOSPERMS.
THIS IS THE CLASS OF PLANTS
THAT MAKES CONSPICUOUS FLOWERS,
FORMS FRUIT AND SEED.
THIS WAS A NEW WAY OF
DOING BUSINESS IN NATURE.
McDormand: THE FLOWER
OF AN ANGIOSPERM
HAS A MALE PART, THE STAMEN,
WHICH PRODUCES POLLEN.
WHETHER TRANSPORTED BY
WIND, BEES, OR HUMANS,
WHEN POLLEN LANDS ON THE
FLOWER'S FEMALE PART,
THE PISTIL, IT
GETS FERTILIZED,
AND GIVES RISE TO SEEDS.
THE SEEDS CONTAIN A MIX OF GENES
FROM BOTH THE MOTHER
AND THE FATHER.
BEFORE THAT, YOU HAD THIS
GREENER, SLEEPIER WORLD
WHERE THINGS REPRODUCE
USUALLY BY CLONING,
BY SPORES THAT WERE GENETICALLY
IDENTICAL TO THEIR PARENTS.
EVOLUTION PROCEEDED IN
A KIND OF POKEY PACE,
BECAUSE YOU DIDN'T
HAVE AS MUCH VARIATION.
AND THEN YOU HAVE THIS
INCREDIBLE EXPLOSION
OF DIVERSITY THAT HAPPENS
WITH THIS NEW STRATEGY.
[ BEE BUZZING ]
IT WAS INCREDIBLY
SUCCESSFUL STRATEGY.
IT ALLOWED YOU TO MOVE
YOUR GENES AROUND,
IT ALLOWED YOU TO
EVOLVE MUCH QUICKER,
BECAUSE SEX CREATES VARIATION.
AND THE MORE NEW
COMBINATIONS YOU TRY,
THE QUICKER YOU CAN ADAPT TO
WHATEVER THE ENVIRONMENT IS.
AND ONE PARTICULAR GROUP
OF THESE ANGIOSPERMS
CAME UP WITH A REALLY,
REALLY CLEVER STRATEGY --
AND THAT WAS
TO APPEAL NOT TO, YOU KNOW,
BUGS OR BIRDS OR BEES,
McDormand: THE FIRST WILD
TULIPS, SCIENTISTS THINK,
SPRANG UP IN THE SAME PLACE
WHERE THE APPLE ORIGINATED --
THE MOUNTAINS OF CENTRAL ASIA.
Pollan: IT WAS TYPICALLY KIND
OF MORE OPEN THAN OUR TULIP,
SO IT HAD A KIND OF
HOURGLASSY SHAPE.
OFTEN HAD A SCENT,
OFTEN HAD A SLIGHTLY
DIFFERENT COLOR INSIDE.
[ HORSE NEIGHS ]
McDormand: DRAWN BY THE
BEAUTY OF THESE WILD FLOWERS,
PEOPLE LEARNED HOW
TO CULTIVATE THEM.
Pollan: UNDER OUR ATTENTION,
THE FLOWER GOT BIGGER,
THE COLORS VERY
OFTEN GOT BRIGHTER,
AND THEN WE STARTED
EXPERIMENTING WITH VARIATION.
McDormand: FROM CENTRAL ASIA,
THE TULIP MADE
ITS WAY TO TURKEY.
IT WAS THERE THAT
THIS BEAUTIFUL FLOWER
BEWITCHED ONE OF THE MOST
POWERFUL MEN IN THE WORLD,
THE SULTAN OF THE
OTTOMAN EMPIRE.
Pollan: THE TURKS AT
VARIOUS TIMES IN HISTORY
REVERED TULIPS.
SULTAN AHMED III WAS FAMOUS
FOR HIS LOVE OF TULIPS,
AND WHEN THEY WERE
IN BLOOM EVERY YEAR,
THERE WAS A FESTIVAL.
EVERY NIGHT THERE WOULD BE
SOME SORT OF PERFORMANCE
TO CELEBRATE TULIPS.
IT WAS SO
EXTRAVAGANT, IN FACT,
THAT THIS HELPED
BRING DOWN THE SULTAN.
McDormand: FOR HIS
SPENDING ON TULIPS
AND OTHER PERCEIVED FAILINGS,
THE SULTAN WAS TOPPLED
FROM HIS THRONE.
BUT IT BY THE TULIP.OYALTY
THAT GOT SEDUCED
IN TCOUNTRY TO GO MAD.URY,
THE FLOWER CAUSED A WHOLE
IT WAS COMPLETELY IRRATIONAL.
AND I DON'T THINK
YOU CAN EXPLAIN IT
ACCORDING TO ANY LOGICAL SCHEME
THAT THIS ENTIRE
SOCIETY WENT NUTS.
McDormand: BETWEEN
1634 AND 1637,
TULIPS SWEPT THE DUTCH
INTO A COLLECTIVE FRENZY
THAT HAS BECOME KNOWN
AS TULIP MANIA.
SPURRED ONE OF THE BIGGEST
INVESTMENT BUBBLES IN HISTORY,
MADE THE TULIP ONE OF THE
MOST VALUABLE COMMODITIES
IN THE WORLD.
Pollan: IT WAS A PURE FINANCIAL
AND IT WAS ABOUT A FLOWER! I
MEAN, HOW AMAZING IS THAT?
McDormand: IT WAS A TIME WHEN
THE DUTCH DOMINATED WORLD TRADE.
AND A LOT OF THEM
WERE GETTING RICH.
IT BECAME FASHIONABLE TO
GROW FLOWER GARDENS --
AND NOTHING SAID
SUCCESS LIKE A TULIP.
Zonneveld: IN THE BEGINNING,
THE RICH PEOPLE IN HOLLAND,
THEY HAVE BIG HOUSES,
AND THEY WANT TO
SHOW THEY'RE WEALTHY.
AT THAT TIME, WERE TULIPS.
Pollan: IT REALLY WAS
ABOUT THE DISPLAY OF
THE EXTRAORDINARY, THE GEM.
AND YOU PICTURE, YOU KNOW,
KIND OF A GRAY, CLOUDY,
DUTCH SPRING AFTERNOON,
AND THAT COLOR
AGAINST THAT STEEL SKY
McDormand: FOR THE TULIP,
THE DUTCH FLOWER GARDENS
OFFERED A CHANCE TO
STRUT ITS STUFF --
AND NO TULIPS DID
SO MORE DRAMATICALLY
THAN THE TYPE KNOWN
AS BROKEN TULIPS.
THEY WERE EXTREMELY RARE,
BUT, BACK THEN,
NO ONE KNEW WHY.
Pollan: A BREAK WAS WHEN
THE BACKGROUND COLOR,
THE SOLID, MATTE,
SATURATED COLOR OF A TULIP
GETS A KIND OF FLAME
OF A SECOND COLOR;
THIS WAS CONSIDERED, YOU KNOW,
THE MOST BEAUTIFUL TULIP.
McDormand: THE MOST PRIZED
OF ALL THE BROKEN TULIPS
WAS ONE OF THE RAREST
-- THE SEMPER AUGUSTUS.
Pollan: IT WAS A
BIG, WHITE TULIP
WITH A SPLASH OF
CARMINE RED ON IT,
WHICH WAS REALLY,
BY GENERAL ACCOUNT,
CONSIDERED THE GREATEST
TULIP EVER FOUND.
THIS WAS THE EPITOME
OF TULIP BEAUTY
IN THE EYE OF THE DUTCH.
McDormand: IF YOU
WANTED A SEMPER AUGUSTUS
YOU'D NEED TO GET YOUR HANDS
ON A SEMPER AUGUSTUS BULB.
THAT'S THE PART OF THE TULIP
THAT LIVES BENEATH THE SOIL --
AND PLANTING A BULB
IS THE ONLY WAY
TO MAKE SURE A TULIP OFFSPRING
WILL LOOK THE SAME
AS ITS PARENT.
BUT IN 17th-CENTURY HOLLAND,
SEMPER AUGUSTUS BULBS
WERE VERY SCARCE.
Man: AT THAT TIME, ONLY
ONE MERCHANT IN AMSTERDAM
UPON HIM TO SELL A SINGLE BULB,
EVENTUALLY ONE MAN PREVAILED
WHICH WAS VALUED AT THE
TIME AT 10,000 FLORINS.
THIS WAS AT A TIME WHEN
THE AVERAGE DUTCH WORKER
WOULD SURVIVE WITH HIS FAMILY
FOR A YEAR ON ABOUT 300.
AND THE FACT THAT SUCH
SALES WERE BEING MADE
AND FOR SUCH COLOSSAL
SUMS OF MONEY
GRADUALLY BECAME
MORE WIDELY KNOWN,
AND THIS REALLY WAS
THE FOUNDATION STONE
OF WHAT BECAME THE TULIP MANIA.
Pollan: AT THE HEIGHT
OF THE TULIP MANIA,
ONE TULIP SOLD FOR AN AMOUNT
EQUIVALENT TO THE PRICE
OF ONE OF THE GRANDEST
CANAL HOUSES IN AMSTERDAM.
NOW, JUST TO PUT IT IN
CONTEMPORARY TERMS,
THIS IS EQUIVALENT TO, SAY,
A TOWNHOUSE ON 5th AVENUE.
$10 MILLION TO $15 MILLION
FOR A SINGLE TULIP BULB.
McDormand: THE TULIP BULB MARKET
HIT ITS PEAK IN FEBRUARY 1637.
THERE WERE 40 MILLION
GUILDERS' WORTH
OF TULIP DEALS OUTSTANDING,
MORE THAN SIX TIMES THE
TOTAL AMOUNT OF MONEY
Pollan: THERE WAS AN AUCTION
HELD IN THE WINTER OF 1637,
AND SOME GREAT TULIP WAS PUT ON
THE MARKET AT A CERTAIN PRICE.
AND IT DIDN'T GET THAT PRICE.
AND THE AUCTIONEER OFFERED
1,000 GUILDERS LESS,
1,000 GUILDERS BELOW THAT,
AND NOBODY BID.
Woman: THE FLOWERS
WERE VERY OVERVALUED.
PEOPLE WERE RISKING FORTUNES,
AND OF COURSE THE WHOLE THING
CAME CRASHING DOWN AT ONCE.
Pollan: AND, SO VERY
SOON AFTER THAT,
ALL THESE TULIPS
WERE WORTHLESS,
AND ALL THESE
PEOPLE WERE RUINED.
THEY HAD PUT THERE
FORTUNES IN THESE FLOWERS,
AND NOW THEY WERE WORTHLESS --
THEY WERE JUST BULBS OF PLANTS.
AND THAT WAS THE END
OF THE TULIP MANIA.
McDormand: SUDDENLY, THE FLOWER
THAT WAS LOVED FOR ITS BEAUTY
BECAME A SYMBOL OF HUMAN FOLLY.
Pollan: THERE WAS A PERIOD OF
TULIP HATRED IN HOLLAND
AFTER THE COLLAPSE,
BECAUSE IT WAS BLAMED FOR
THIS ECONOMIC DISASTER.
THERE WAS A FAMOUS
PROFESSOR IN LEIDEN
WHO'D RUN AROUND WITH
A STICK BEATING TULIPS
AND THERE WERE ALL THESE
PAMPHLETS AND BROADSIDES
ABOUT THE EVILS
OF THE TULIP MANIA
AND THE GREAT
WHORE GODDESS FLORA
WHO WAS BLAMED FOR
BRINGING THE DUTCH DOWN,
AS IF, YOU KNOW, IT WAS THE
FLOWER THAT DID IT TO THEM.
IT'S AN EXTRAORDINARY
HISTORICAL EPISODE,
AND WE LOOK BACK AND WE
LOOK DOWN, AND WE SAY,
HOW COULD THEY DO THIS? BUT
OF COURSE WE'VE BEEN THROUGH
AND IT DOESN'T REALLY MATTER
WHAT YOU'RE TRADING --
AS LONG AS THE PRICE
IS GOING UP REALLY FAST,
EVERYBODY WANTS IN.
AND AS LONG AS THERE'S
A GREATER FOOL,
A LOT OF MONEY CAN BE MADE.
YOU JUST DON'T WANT TO BE LEFT
HOLDING THE BAG OR THE
BULB AT THE END OF IT.
McDormand: WHAT NONE
OF THE RUINED INVESTORS
COULD POSSIBLY HAVE KNOWN
WAS THAT THE BREAKS IN COLOR
THEY SAW AS THE
EPITOME OF BEAUTY
WERE ACTUALLY CAUSED BY A VIRUS.
THE TULIP BULBS THAT SOLD FOR
THE PRICE OF 5th
AVENUE TOWNHOUSES
TURNED OUT TO BE DAMAGED GOODS.
Stewart: WELL,
THIS IS SOMETHING
THAT NOBODY UNDERSTOOD
AT THE TIME --
I MEAN, NO ONE IN THE
1600s AND THE 1700s
HAD ANY NOTION OF
PLANT DISEASES,
OR ANY IDEA THAT THE
VARIATION IN A FLOWER
COULD BE CAUSED BY
SOMETHING LIKE A DISEASE.
McDormand: TODAY,
VIRUSES LIKE THE ONE
THAT ONCE DROVE THE TULIP'S
VALUE TO RECORD HEIGHTS
ARE THE ENEMY OF THE
GLOBAL TULIP TRADE,
BECAUSE INFECTED BULBS
CANNOT BE EXPORTED.
SO PLANT PHYSIOLOGISTS LIKE
HENK GUDE ARE WORKING HARD
TO COMBAT THEM.
Gude: A TULIP THAT IS
INFECTED WITH A VIRUS
IS NOT A HEALTHY TULIP --
IT COSTS LOTS OF
ENERGY FOR THE PLANT
TO COPE WITH THE VIRUS.
AND IF YOU REPLANT THE
BULB YEAR AFTER YEAR,
THEN ITS GROWING POTENTIAL
WILL DECLINE OVER THE YEARS.
SO, IN A FEW YEARS, YOU
WILL NOT HAVE A TULIP LEFT.
McDormand: GUDE WORKS FOR
THE APPLIED PLANT
RESEARCH CENTER
AT WAGENINGEN UNIVERSITY
IN THE NETHERLANDS.
Gude: TO FIND OUT IF A PLANT IS
INFECTED BY A VIRUS, WE
HAVE TO HOMOGENIZE IT,
TO SQUEEZE JUICE FROM IT,
AND WE CAN DETECT THE PRESENCE
OF THE VIRUS IN THE JUICE
WITH LAB TECHNIQUES.
WHEN WE UNDERSTAND
HOW THE PLANT GROWS,
WE CAN TRY TO MAKE THE PLANT DO
WHAT WE WANT IT TO DO --
AND IMMEDIATELY APPLY IT
FOR THE BENEFIT OF GROWERS
AND BREEDERS AND EXPORTERS.
McDormand: ONE OF THESE
PEOPLE IS JAN LIGTHART,
WHO HAS BEEN GROWING TULIPS
FOR MORE THAN 30 YEARS
AND HAS BECOME ONE OF HOLLAND'S
MOST SUCCESSFUL BREEDERS.
Ligthart: WHAT YOU
SEE FROM HERE TO THERE
IS ALL NEW SEEDLINGS.
THIS IS THE FIRST TIME
I SEE THEM FLOWERING.
I WANTED TO BE A CARPENTER,
JUST LIKE MY FATHER,
WORKING WITH WOOD.
AND WHEN I SAW THE
TULIPS, I WAS ASTONISHED.
I SAID, AH! THAT'S
WHAT I WANT TO BE!
TULIP GARDENER.
McDormand: LIGTHART'S FIRST
STEP IN BREEDING A NEW VARIETY
IS TO ACT LIKE A
HUMAN BUMBLEBEE,
MOVING POLLEN FROM
ONE PLACE TO ANOTHER.
Ligthart: THE PROCESS
IS QUITE SIMPLE.
WE USE ONE TULIP AS THE FATHER
AND THE OTHER JUST
LIKE THE MOTHER.
AND WE MAKE POLLINATION.
Pollan: THE BREEDERS
OF TULIPS TODAY
ARE INTERESTED IN
NEW COMBINATIONS.
THEY'RE SEX CRAZY, RIGHT?
THEY'RE OPERATING THESE,
YOU KNOW, PLANT BROTHELS.
AND OUT OF THAT COMES A
GREAT DEAL OF VARIATION.
AND OUT OF THAT VARIATION IS
THE FUTURE OF THE SPECIES.
McDormand: DABBING THE POLLEN
TAKES JUST A FEW SECONDS.
BUT IT CAN TAKE YEARS
BEFORE LIGTHART CAN BE SURE
THAT HIS NEW VARIETY WILL
CONSISTENTLY PRODUCE FLOWERS
WITH THE QUALITIES
THE MARKET DEMANDS --
LIKE DURABILITY, DISEASE
RESISTANCE, AND BEAUTY.
THAT'S ENOUGH.
Ligthart: ONE OF THE
THOUSAND SEEDLINGS
ARE WHAT I WANT.
THE REST IS NOT GOOD ENOUGH.
THAT'S THE HARDEST PART.
YOU HAVE TO LOOK OUT
FOR THE FIRST,
THE ONLY GOOD ONE.
McDormand: THIS YEAR,
LIGTHART IS PINNING HIS HOPES
ON THE BULBS FROM ONE OF HIS
LATEST BREEDING EXPERIMENTS.
THIS TULIP, THAT
IS MY FAVORITE.
I GIVE IT A BIG FUTURE.
JUST THE RIGHT COLOR.
PURE PINK.
NINEFOR THE FIRST TIME,DS.
WHEN I SAW THIS TULIP BLOOMING
IN MY SEEDLINGS,
I WAS JUST AMAZED.
I SAT THERE ON MY KNEES
AND LOOKED AT THEM
FOR A LONG TIME.
OTHER TULIPS, YOU WALK BY
AND IT DOESN'T VENTURE
TO DO ANYTHING TO YOU.
AND WHEN YOU SEE THIS ONE,
YOUR HEART GETS... CK-CK!
THIS MAKES A DIFFERENCE.
EACH TIME I LOOK AT IT...
I FELL IN LOVE ON THE TULIP.
[ ENGINE PUTTERING ]
McDormand: BUT LIGTHART'S LOVE
FOR HIS TULIPS DOESN'T STOP HIM
AND HIS FAMILY FROM
RIPPING THE FLOWERS
OFF THEIR STALKS EVERY SPRING.
THE FLOWERS WOULD DIVERT
NUTRIENTS FROM THE BULBS,
WHICH, FOR A BREEDER
LIKE LIGTHART,
ARE WHAT BRINGS IN THE MONEY.
Ligthart: WHAT I WANT
TO DO FOR A TULIP
IS TO CREATE A MUCH BIGGER
MARKET FOR THE WHOLE WORLD.
BECAUSE A TULIP MUST MAKE MONEY.
IT'S A BUSINESS.
YOU CAN'T HAVE THEM FOR FUN
BECAUSE WE HAVE
TO MAKE A LIVING.
McDormand: LIGTHART'S
BEST TULIPS
OFTEN GET INTRODUCED TO THE
REST OF THE WORLD HERE,
AT THE KEUKENHOF
GARDENS NEAR AMSTERDAM.
EVERY SPRING, HALF
A MILLION VISITORS
FLOCK HERE TO SEE THE FOUR
AND A HALF MILLION BULBS
THAT MAKE IT THE LARGEST
TULIP GARDEN IN THE WORLD.
Pollan: THE DUTCH HAVE MASTERED
THE PROPAGATION OF TULIPS.
AND THERE ARE PEOPLE IN HOLLAND
MAKING GREAT FORTUNES
OFF OF TULIPS YET AGAIN.
IT'S NOT A BUBBLE ANYMORE,
IT'S A MATURE INDUSTRY.
McDormand: AND A
VERY LUCRATIVE ONE,
WHOSE BUSTLING
NERVE CENTER PROVES
JUST HOW HARD WE'RE
WILLING TO WORK
TO SPREAD FLOWERS
AROUND THE WORLD.
ONE OUT OF EVERY THREE FLOWERS
BOUGHT AND SOLD IN THE WORLD
PASSES THROUGH HERE.
THIS IS THE FLOWER AUCTION IN
THE DUTCH TOWN OF AALSMEER.
[ BELL RINGING ]
Stewart: YOU'RE NOT ALLOWED
ON THE AUCTION FLOOR,
BECAUSE THERE ARE A MILLION
CARTS ZIPPING AROUND
AT ALARMOF FLOWERS.SPEEDS.
AND IT IS LIKE A SEA
IT'S ALMOST LIKE WATCHING PAINT
BEING MIXED ON A PALETTE.
YOU KNOW, YOU WATCH THIS LINE
OF YELLOW SUNFLOWERS
SNAKING THEIR WAY
THROUGH THIS OCEAN
OF RED TULIPS.
IT'S JUST DAZZLING IN THAT WAY.
McDormand: THE FLOOR OF
THE FLOWER AUCTION COVERS
AN AREA BIGGER THAN
200 FOOTBALL FIELDS,
MAKING IT ONE OF THE LARGEST
BUILDINGS ON THE PLANET.
SOME 19 MILLION FLOWERS
FROM ALL OVER THE
WORLD CHANGE HANDS HERE
EVERY DAY.
IT'S AN EXTRAORDINARILY
COMPLEX SYSTEM,
WITH A VERY SIMPLE PURPOSE --
TO MOVE FLOWERS FROM
THE FIELD TO THE HOME
AS QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE.
Woman: IN FLOWER
BUSINESS, THREE THINGS
ARE VERY IMPORTANT,
AND THAT'S BEING FAST,
BEING FAST, AND BEING FAST,
BECAUSE THE FLOWER
THAT'S FRESH TODAY
WILL LOSE 15% OF
ITS VALUE TOMORROW.
Stewart: THE MINUTE YOU
CUT IT, IT STARTS TO DIE.
THERE IS THIS RACE ON
TO GET IT TO MARKET.
McDormand: ONCE
THE DEAL IS STRUCK,
THE PERISHABLE FLOWERS ARE
RUSHED TO THE AMSTERDAM AIRPORT
AND FROM THERE TO FLOWER
SHOPS ALL OVER THE WORLD.
Stewart: THIS INCESSANT,
UNRELENTING MOVEMENT
OF FLOWERS AND MONEY
DOESN'T LET UP FOR A SECOND.
McDormand: ALL FOR A PRODUCT
THAT HAS ABSOLUTELY
NO PRACTICAL VALUE.
Pollan: FLOWERS ARE
EXQUISITELY USELESS.
THEY'RE THIS GREAT FROTH OR
EXTRAVAGANCE IN OUR LIVES.
BUT THAT THERE IS A
MULTI-BILLION-DOLLAR TRADE
IN THESE WONDERFULLY USELESS,
BEAUTIFUL THINGS
IS KIND OF GREAT.
WHEN YOU BEGIN TO LOOK AT
THE PLANT'S POINT OF VIEW,
I SUPPOSE THE GREATEST
THREAT TO YOUR SURVIVAL
IS PEOPLE LOSING
INTEREST IN YOU,
FALLING OUT OF FASHION.
YOU KNOW, THE GILLYFLOWER
OR THE PINK --
THESE WERE IMPORTANT
VICTORIAN FLOWERS.
I DON'T EVEN KNOW
WHAT THEY LOOK LIKE.
SO THE FLOWER HAS TO
KEEP US INTERESTED.
AND ONE OF THE WAYS A FLOWER
KEEPS US INTERESTED IS CHANGING.
THE REALLY INGENIOUS ONES
ARE THE ONES THAT
FIGURE OUT WAYS
TO REENGAGE US EVERY GENERATION.
McDormand: IN THE PLANT WORLD,
JUST LIKE OUR OWN, NOT
EVERYONE CAN BE BEAUTIFUL,
OR SWEET.
BUT EVEN A LOWLY WEED CAN
GET US TO WORK FOR IT,
AND QUITE SLAVISHLY, AT THAT,
IF IT'S CLEVER ENOUGH
TO CASH IN ON A SKILL
THAT EVERY PLANT IS BORN WITH --
ITS ABILITY TO MAKE CHEMICALS.
Pollan: THE GENIUS OF PLANTS
IS REALLY THE ARTS
OF BIOCHEMISTRY,
CREATING THESE
REALLY INTERESTING,
COMPLICATED,
ORIGINAL MOLECULES.
SOME ARE DESIGNED
TO PRODUCE FLAVORS.
OTHERS ARE DESIGNED TO
PRODUCE GREAT BEAUTY.
AND THEN YOU'VE GOT
THIS CLASS OF PLANTS
THAT IS PRODUCING
THESE MOLECULES
THAT, INCREDIBLY,
HAVE THE POWER
TO ALTER WHAT GOES
ON IN THE HUMAN MIND.
McDormand: THIS PLANT, BY
MAKING JUST SUCH A MOLECULE,
HAS ALL OVER THE WORLD. IT
SCIENTISTS CALL IT CANNABIS.
IT IS BETTER KNOWN AS MARIJUANA.
Pollan: CANNABIS RECOGNIZED,
METAPHORICALLY SPEAKING,
THAT THIS WAS ITS PATH
TO WORLD DOMINATION.
PRODUCE MORE OF THIS MOLECULE,
AND THERE WILL BE
MORE MARIJUANA PLANTS
GIVEN MORE HABITAT BY
THIS CREATURE WHO LIKES
WHAT THIS MOLECULE SEEMS TO DO.
McDormand: AND BY
TRYING TO FIGURE OUT
JUST HOW THAT MOLECULE WORKS,
SCIENTISTS STUMBLED ON
AN AMAZING DISCOVERY
ABOUT THE WORKINGS
OF OUR BRAINS.
Pollan: THIS PLANT HAS OPENED UP
THIS VERY FRUITFUL
PATH OF INQUIRY
INTO UNDERSTANDING
HOW MEMORY WORKS,
HOW CONSCIOUSNESS WORKS,
HOW EMOTION WORKS.
WE HAVE UNLOCKED
THIS WHOLE MECHANISM
AND WE WOULD NOT KNOW EXISTED,
IF NOT FOR THIS PLANT.
Man: HUMAN BEINGS ARE
BORN WITH AN INNATE DRIVE
TO EXPERIENCE OTHER STATES OF
CONSCIOUSNESS PERIODICALLY.
I THINK YOU CAN SEE
THIS IN YOUNG KIDS,
WHO BEGIN SPINNING
AT EARLY AGES.
AMUSEMENT PARK RIDES
SERVE THE SAME PURPOSE.
THERE'S AN ENDLESS
STREAM OF ACTIVITIES
THAT CAN SHIFT CONSCIOUSNESS
-- EVERYTHING FROM SINGING,
DANCING, HAVING SEX,
JUMPING OUT OF AIRPLANES.
AND DRUGS ARE CLEARLY ONE WAY
OF GETTING THESE EXPERIENCES.
Man: PEOPLE LIKE TO HAVE
THAT ALTERED CONSCIOUSNESS.
I'M NOT SAYING THAT'S
GOOD, BUT IT'S --
INDIVIDUALS SEEK IT OUT.
Weil: MARIJUANA
SEEMS TO HAVE MADE
AN EVOLUTIONARY DECISION
LONG AGO THAT IT WAS
GOING TO THROW ITS LOT
IN WITH HUMAN BEINGS.
FROM THE PLANT'S
POINT OF VIEW,
THE PSYCHOACTIVITY IS AN
ATTRACTIVE CHARACTERISTIC
WHICH HAS BROUGHT THE
PLANT GREAT SUCCESS.
THERE'S A LOT MORE MARIJUANA
BEING GROWN TODAY,
AND THE REASON IS
THAT HUMANS LIKE IT.
THEY LIKE IT BECAUSE
IT GETS THEM HIGH.
McDormand: BUT CANNABIS
CAN ALSO GET THEM
LOCKED UP.
750,000 ARRESTS A YEAR
FOR CANNABIS POSSESSION.
MAKES IT ABOUT THIRD
AMONG ALL CRIMES.
AND SO YOU'VE GOT
25,000 OR 30,000
PEOPLE BEHIND BARS
AT ANY ONE TIME
FOR CANNABIS OFFENSES.
McDormand: BUT
MARIJUANA STILL ENTICES
NEARLY 15 MILLION AMERICANS
TO SMOKE IT EVERY MONTH.
AND NEARLY 100
MILLION HAVE TRIED IT.
TO KEEP UP WITH THAT DEMAND,
CANNABIS GROWERS CATER TO
THE PLANT'S EVERY WHIM...
Man: WE'RE GOING TO LOSE
THAT TAP, AREN'T WE?
McDormand: PAMPERING IT
LIKE A SPOILED CHILD.
Man: WE DO ANYTHING
IT TELLS US TO.
IF THE PLANT SAYS
IT WANTS SOMETHING,
WE LISTEN AND WE GIVE IT TO IT.
AND THAT'S THE WHOLE THING --
LISTENING CAREFULLY -- AND
WE'RE LISTENING ALL THE TIME
AND OBSERVING ALL THE TIME.
WE WORK FOR THEM.
McDormand: THIS MAN AND
WOMAN LIVE IN A STATE
WHERE GROWING MARIJUANA
FOR MEDICAL USE IS LEGAL.
WE AGREED TO CONCEAL
THEIR IDENTITIES,
BECAUSE THEY STILL RISK
PROSECUTION UNDER FEDERAL LAW.
Woman: YEAH, THAT'S A BEAUTY.
McDormand: BUT WHATEVER
THE LEGAL RISKS,
THE HORTICULTURAL
CHALLENGES THEY FACE
WOULD BE FAMILIAR TO
ANY FARMER OR GARDENER.
Woman: IT'S A DAILY EFFORT,
AND THERE ARE THINGS LIKE,
OH, DID WE
OVER-NUTRIATE THE WATER?
DID WE UNDER-NUTRIATE
THE WATER?
EVERYTHING HAS REALLY
TIGHT PARAMETERS,
AND WE TRY TO KEEP AS TIGHT
AS CONTROL AS POSSIBLE,
BUT IT'S -- IT'S A BATTLE.
Man: MY ASSOCIATE IS
REALLY THE GREEN THUMB
IN THIS ENTERPRISE.
AND I'VE NOTICED THAT WHEN SHE'S
NOT AROUND FOR A
COUPLE OF DAYS,
THE PLANTS KNOW IT.
I MEAN, I'M NOT
MAKING THAT UP.
I MEAN, I ALMOST HEAR THEM
WHISPERING, WHERE IS SHE?
THEY DON'T DO AS
WELL, YOU KNOW,
McDormand: STRANGE AS IT MAY
SEEM, THESE CANNABIS GROWERS
ARE PART OF A VERY
LONG TRADITION.
Weil: IN EVERY CULTURE AND
IN EVERY AGE OF HISTORY,
AN ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF
HUMAN ENERGY HAS GONE INTO
THE PRODUCTION, DISTRIBUTION,
AND CONSUMPTION
OF PSYCHOACTIVE PLANTS.
Man: THE ONLY SOCIETY
THAT WE KNOW OF
FOR WHOM THERE IS
NO NATIVE INTOXICANT
ARE THE INUITS, AND
THAT'S SIMPLY BECAUSE
NOTHING GROWS UP THERE
THAT THEY COULD USE.
Weil: IN ALMOST EVERY SOCIETY,
ONE OR TWO OR A SMALL
NUMBER OF INTOXICANTS
ARE ACCEPTED -- AND
NOT ONLY ACCEPTED,
BUT THEIR USE IS
ACTIVELY PROMOTED --
AND THE REST ARE CONDEMNED.
BUT THERE'S NO AGREEMENT
FROM CULTURE TO CULTURE
AS TO WHICH ARE THE GOOD ONES
AND WHICH ARE THE BAD ONES.
Pollan: SO YOU HAVE ALCOHOL,
WHICH IS AN EVERYDAY DRUG
USED IN OUR SOCIETY --
THAT HAS A TABOO ON
IT IN ISLAMIC SOCIETY.
McDormand: AND THOUGH
CANNABIS IS ILLEGAL
IN MOST PLACES TODAY,
MANY CULTURES THROUGHOUT
HISTORY HAVE TOLERATED IT.
FROM THE TIME THE PLANT
WAS FIRST DISCOVERED
IN INDIA AND CHINA
THOUSANDS OF YEARS AGO,
PEOPLE HAVE SEEN IT AS MORE
THAN JUST AN INTOXICANT.
LONG BEFORE THE
DISCOVERY OF ASPIRIN,
CANNABIS WAS USED AS
A MEDICAL TREATMENT
FOR RELIEVING PAIN.
DEALING WITH PAIN -- YOU KNOW,
THAT'S A TREMENDOUS
PART OF HUMAN LIFE.
AND IT WAS A BIGGER PART
BEFORE MODERN TIMES.
WE DIDN'T HAVE MANY PAINKILLERS.
WE DIDN'T HAVE ANTIBIOTICS.
AND A LOT OF INTOXICANTS,
EVEN IF THEY DON'T
DIMINISH PAIN, THE
WAY OPIUM DOES,
THEY TAKE YOUR MIND OFF IT.
AND THAT'S VERY,
VERY IMPORTANT.
McDormand: IN
19th-CENTURY AMERICA,
CANNABIS WAS A POPULAR
TREATMENT FOR CONDITIONS
SUCH AS LABOR PAINS,
ASTHMA, AND RHEUMATISM.
Pollan: YOU COULD WALK
INTO ANY DRUG STORE
IN AMERICA AND BUY
TINCTURES OF CANNABIS.
CANNABIS WAS INCLUDED IN ALL
SORTS OF MEDICAL PREPARATIONS.
McDormand: BUT EVERYTHING WOULD
CHANGE IN THE 20th CENTURY,
WHEN THE PLANT GOT ITS
NEW NAME, MARIJUANA.
TWAS A POPULAR
INTOXICANT. WHERE CANNABIS
IN FACT, PANCHO
VILLA'S REBEL ARMY
SANG A MARCHING SONG
ABOUT A COCKROACH
WHO FUELED HIMSELF
WITH MARIJUANA.
DURING THE 1920s,
MANY MEXICANS
IMMIGRATED TO THE UNITED STATES.
AND SOME BROUGHT THE CUSTOM
OF MARIJUANA SMOKING WITH THEM.
Man: CANNABIS WAS CERTAINLY
MORE COMMON AMONG
MEXICAN AMERICANS,
AND TO SOME EXTENT,
AMONG AFRICAN AMERICANS
IN THE '20s AND '30s
THAN IT WAS AMONG WHITES.
I MEAN, YOU'D FIND IT,
YOU KNOW, VERY POPULAR
IN THE MUSIC SCENE
IN NEW ORLEANS,
VERY POPULAR AMONG AFRICAN
AMERICAN MUSICIANS.
THE JAZZ WORLD WAS REALLY
SOAKED IN CANNABIS.
McDormand: THE GREAT
LOUIS ARMSTRONG
FELT MARIJUANA ENHANCED
HIS ABILITY TO IMPROVISE.
[ PLAYING JAZZ ]
Pollan: CANNABIS
PROPOSES THIS IDEA
OF TIME STOPPING,
BEING ABLE TO EXPLORE
THE PRESENT MOMENT -- FORGET
THE PAST, FORGET THE FUTURE,
JUST BE THERE AND SEE
WHAT YOU CAN COME UP WITH.
EVEN IF IT'S A
SONG YOU'VE PLAYED
A MILLION TIMES
BEFORE, IT BECOMES NEW,
STRANGE, WONDERFUL.
YOU SEE NEW POSSIBILITIES IN
IT THAT WEREN'T THERE BEFORE.
McDormand: IN THE 1960s,
USE OF MARIJUANA SOARED.
THE DRUG HAD BEEN ILLEGAL
FOR MORE THAN 20 YEARS.
BUT THAT DIDN'T STOP AN ENTIRE
GENERATION FROM EMBRACING IT.
Pollan: IT WAS WELL SUITED
TO THE SPIRIT OF THAT TIME.
YOU KNOW, EVERY DRUG
HAS ITS CHARACTER,
IS NOT ABOUT BEING HYPER
AND WORKING REALLY HARD.
IT IS A DRUG THAT MAKES
YOU NOT WANT TO STRIVE.
IT'S ABOUT KICKING BACK,
LISTENING TO MUSIC.
SO IT JUST KIND OF FIT
THE SPIRIT OF THE '60s.
Man: MARIJUANA SEEMS
TO SECOND THE MOTION,
NO MATTER WHAT THE MOTION IS.
McDormand: TO MANY AMERICANS,
THE FACT THAT MILLIONS
OF YOUNG PEOPLE
WERE SMOKING MARIJUANA
THREATENED THE VERY
FABRIC OF SOCIETY.
THOSE FEARS PROMPTED
THE GOVERNMENT
TO TAKE ACTION.
Narrator: OPERATION INTERCEPT
IS DESIGNED TO MAKE IT
MORE DIFFICULT TO
BRING MARIJUANA
McDormand: MOST
OF THE MARIJUANA WAS
COMING IN FROM MEXICO,
AND THE PLANT SOON FOUND
ITSELF UNDER ATTACK.
THE WEAPON -- A TOXIC
CHEMICAL CALLED PARAQUAT.
Pollan: WE HAVE
TO REMEMBER THAT IN THE
EVOLUTION OF A SPECIES,
EVERYTHING COUNTS AS A
FACTOR OF NATURAL SELECTION,
INCLUDING THINGS
LIKE, OH, THE DECISION
BY THE UNITED STATES
GOVERNMENT IN THE '70s
TO PRESSURE MEXICO TO SPRAY
HERBICIDE ON THEIR POT FIELDS.
McDormand: FROM 1975
TO 1983, MEXICAN PILOTS
DOUSED THE COUNTRY'S CANNABIS
FIELDS WITH THE POISON.
Pollan: THERE WAS SOME
CONCERN THAT IT WOULD
GET INTO THE
PRODUCT COMING NORTH
IF IT WAS CUT RIGHT
AFTER IT WAS SPRAYED,
AND THAT, AS PEOPLE
INHALED THIS, IT PROBABLY
WASN'T VERY GOOD FOR YOU.
Man: THIS IS A DRUG-TESTING LAB
IN PALO ALTO, CALIFORNIA.
THE PEOPLE HERE ARE RECEIVING
300 SAMPLES OF MARIJUANA
A DAY FROM SMOKERS
WHO WANT TO KNOW IF THEIR
POT IS CONTAMINATED.
Man: PEOPLE ARE EXTREMELY
ANXIOUS ABOUT THIS PROBLEM,
AND FRANKLY, I
DON'T BLAME THEM.
McDormand: MEXICAN MARIJUANA
BEGAN TO DEVELOP
A VERY BAD NAME.
Pollan: THIS HAD THE
UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCE
OF CREATING A DOMESTIC
MARIJUANA INDUSTRY
THAT HADN'T REALLY
EXISTED BEFORE.
McDormand: IT WAS CONCENTRATED
IN CALIFORNIA, HAWAII,
AND OTHER STATES
WHOSE CLIMATE WAS FAVORABLE
FOR THE TROPICAL PLANT.
Pollan: ONCE THIS AMERICAN
MARIJUANA AGRICULTURE
GOT STARTED, IT WAS
VERY, VERY SUCCESSFUL,
AND THE GOVERNMENT WAS KIND
OF SHOCKED TO FIND ONE YEAR
THAT THE TOTAL AMOUNT SEIZED
EXCEEDED THEIR ESTIMATE OF
THE TOTAL SIZE OF THE CROP.
AND THEY REALIZED, OOH, I
THINK WE'RE MISSING SOMETHING.
THERE MUST BE A LOT MORE
MARIJUANA OUT THERE.
AND INDEED, THERE WAS,
ALL OVER THE WEST COAST.
McDormand: THE GOVERNMENT
DISPATCHED HELICOPTERS
TO FIND THE FIELDS AND FORCE
THE GROWERS OUT OF BUSINESS.
Man: WHEN LOCAL AND
FEDERAL AGENTS RAIDED
THIS MARIJUANA FIELD IN
NORTHERN CALIFORNIA TODAY,
THEY FOUND MORE
THAN $50,000 WORTH
OF MARIJUANA READY
TO BE HARVESTED.
A TASK FORCE IS WAGING AN
ALL-OUT WAR AGAINST POT.
Pollan: SO, WITH THE RISE
OF THE DRUG WAR, IN A WAY,
YOU'VE GOT A THREAT
TO THIS PLANT.
AND IT'S VERY INTERESTING TO SEE
HOW THE PLANT COPED.
McDormand: CANNABIS,
AS PLANTS SO OFTEN DO,
FOUND A WAY NOT ONLY
TO SURVIVE THE THREAT,
BUT TO COME OUT AHEAD.
Pollan: AND WHAT HAPPENED?
WELL, THE GROWERS
AND THE PLANT
ADAPTED -- THEY MOVED INDOORS.
THE PROBLEM WITH
MOVING INDOORS IS,
THIS IS A 12-FOOT-TALL PLANT.
SO WHAT THEY NEEDED WERE
THE GENES OF A
SHORTER CANNABIS PLANT
TO BREED WITH THEIR TALL PLANT.
McDormand: SO THE
PIONEERS OF INDOOR GROWING
CROSS-BRED THE TALL
WARM-WEATHER SPECIES,
CANNABIS SATIVA,
WITH A LOW-GROWING MOUNTAIN
SPECIES FOUND MOSTLY IN ASIA,
Pollan: THEY BROUGHT TOGETHER
THESE TWO GREAT STRAINS
IN THE MARIJUANA FAMILY
AND CREATED A PLANT THAT WAS
SHORT, FAST, AND STRONG.
Lenson: THE PLANT,
WHICH HAD ONCE
BEEN A SKINNY LITTLE
PIECE OF DITCH WEED,
IS NOW A PAMPERED,
SPECTACULARLY GOOD-LOOKING,
MULTI-COLORED, RICH,
RESINOUS BEING.
HARDLY THE SPECIES
IT WAS BEFORE AT ALL.
IT'S TURNED COMPLETELY
INTO SOMETHING ELSE.
McDormand: NURTURED BY
CREATIVE INDOOR GARDENERS,
CANNABIS IS NOW A
FAR MORE POTENT PLANT
THAN IT WAS A GENERATION AGO.
THE KEY TO THAT TRANSFORMATION
WAS STRIPPING AWAY
THE RULE OF NATURE AND
REPLACING IT WITH OUR OWN.
Man: IT'S AN ARTIFICIAL
ENVIRONMENT,
COMPLETELY ARTIFICIAL.
EVERYTHING ABOUT
OUR NATURAL WORLD
IS UNNATURAL, EVERYTHING.
Woman: IT'S REALLY
LIKE A SUPER-PLANT.
Man: IN THE NATURAL WORLD,
THE PLANTS HERE WOULD BE
SIX TO NINE MONTHS
FROM SEED TO HARVEST.
THAT'S JUST SIMPLY INEFFICIENT.
YOU COULDN'T
JUSTIFY AN OPERATION
WITH SUCH A SLOW TURNAROUND.
SO, INSTEAD OF SIX TO
NINE MONTHS, IN MY WORLD,
THESE PLANTS LIVE THEIR
ENTIRE LIFE CYCLE IN 90 DAYS.
McDormand: TO GET
THEM TO DO THAT,
TO PRECISELY CONTROLLED
AMOUNTS OF NUTRIENTS, WATER,
Pollan: THEY'RE UNDER LIGHTS
THAT ARE BLINDINGLY BRIGHT,
THOUSANDS OF WATTS,
24 HOURS A DAY.
AND THESE PLANTS
ARE JUST, LIKE,
SOAKING UP THIS LIGHT
-- THEY LOVE IT.
I MEAN, THEY'RE JUST BATHING
IN LIGHT AND GROWING SO FAST,
YOU CAN ALMOST HEAR THE
CREAK OF THEIR CELLS
AS THEY STRETCH AND DIVIDE.
McDormand: ALL THAT
LIGHT GENERATES
A TREMENDOUS AMOUNT OF HEAT.
Man: IF I DIDN'T
HAVE AIR CONDITIONING
AND AIR CIRCULATION
AND VENTILATION FANS
MOVING THE HEAT
OUT OF THAT ROOM,
THESE PLANTS WOULD COOK
IN A MATTER OF HOURS.
IT'S SO COMPLICATED, WE'RE
NOT SMART ENOUGH TO DO IT.
WE HAVE TO HAVE A
FULL-TIME ELECTRONIC NANNY
WATCHING THE PLANTS
ALL THE TIME.
SO THESE AREN'T NORMAL PLANTS.
THESE ARE SUPER-HYPER PLANTS
THAT ARE RIGHT ON THE
EDGE AT ALL TIMES.
McDormand: IT'S NOT
JUST A QUICKER HARVEST
THE GROWERS ARE AFTER,
BUT A BIGGER BUD
AND A STRONGER HIGH.
TO ACHIEVE THAT,
THEY INTERFERE WITH
THE NATURAL PROCESS.
FEMALE MARIJUANA PLANTS
PRODUCE A STICKY RESIN
THAT CATCHES THE POLLEN
THAT MALE PLANTS PRODUCE.
THAT RESIN IS HIGHLY
PSYCHOACTIVE.
TO TRICK THE FEMALES
INTO MAKING MORE OF IT,
THE GROWERS KEEP MALE PLANTS
EXILED FROM THE GROW ROOM.
Man: SO, IN ESSENCE,
WHAT YOU'RE SEEING
IS EXTREME SEXUAL FRUSTRATION.
THIS IS A ROOM FULL OF WOMEN
WHO ARE LOOKING FOR
SOME GUY TO COME BY
AND GIVE THEM SOME POLLEN
SO THEY CAN CREATE SEEDS.
AND THEY TRY HARDER AND
HARDER AS TIME PASSES,
AND THE MORE
UNSUCCESSFUL THEY ARE,
THE MORE THE PRODUCTION
OF THE RESINS
THAT IS INTENDED
TO ATTRACT POLLEN
INCREASE, AND THAT INCREASES
THE PSYCHOACTIVE
ELEMENTS OF THE PLANT.
Pollan: THEY ARE THE BEST
GARDENERS OF MY GENERATION,
I REALIZED AT A CERTAIN POINT.
YOU KNOW, THE BEST
GARDENERS OF MY GENERATION
ARE NOT HYBRIDIZING
ROSES, ARE NOT, YOU KNOW,
THEY'RE WORKING WITH THIS
INCREDIBLY VALUABLE,
INCREDIBLY INTERESTING
PLANT CALLED CANNABIS.
Woman: IF THIS TURNS
INTO ANYTHING GOOD,
THOUGH, LOOK AT IT, I MEAN,
THIS IS HOW THICK THE STALK IS
WHEN IT'S JUST GONE TO BLOOM.
IT'S GOT A BEAUTIFUL
SHAPE. IT IS NICE.
Pollan: I MEAN,
THINK ABOUT IT.
THIS THING'S A
WEED. IT'S A WEED.
IT'S A WEED THAT'S WORTH, YOU
KNOW, IN THE OPEN MARKET,
LIKE, YOU KNOW,
$6,000, $7,000 A POUND.
PRETTY GOOD FOR A WEED, HUH?
McDormand: BUT CANNABIS
ONLY FETCHES THAT PRICE
BECAUSE OF THAT ONE
PARTICULAR MOLECULE IT MAKES
THAT GETS PEOPLE HIGH.
ITS NAME IS THC, AND
IT WAS DISCOVERED
IN A LAB IN JERUSALEM BY
CHEMIST RAPHAEL MECHOULAM.
Man: CANNABIS HAD NOT
BEEN WELL INVESTIGATED,
WHICH WAS STRANGE -- AFTER
ALL, IT WAS BEING USED
ILLEGALLY OR LEGALLY
BY MILLIONS OF PEOPLE.
AND YET WE DIDN'T KNOW
THAT MUCH ABOUT IT.
SO I THOUGHT, IT'S A GOOD
IDEA TO LOOK AT IT AGAIN
FROM A MODERN POINT OF VIEW.
McDormand: IN THE LAB,
MECHOULAM AND HIS COLLEAGUES
BROKE CANNABIS
DOWN AND ZEROED IN
ON THE CHEMICAL COMPONENTS THAT
MIGHT BE CAUSING ITS EFFECTS.
Mechoulam: WE ISOLATED
ABOUT 10 COMPOUNDS.
SURPRISINGLY, OUT OF THE
10 COMPOUNDS WE ISOLATED,
ONLY ONE --
WHICH NOW IS KNOWN AS
DELTA-9-TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL,
IN SHORT, THC --
ONLY ONE CAUSES THE
WELL-KNOWN HIGH.
WE TESTED IT IN HUMANS
-- MANY OF MY FRIENDS.
AND WE SAW THAT THE
COMPOUND IS EFFECTIVE,
AS WE EXPECTED IT TO BE.
McDormand: THE IDENTIFICATION
OF THC ANSWERED ONE QUESTION,
BUT RAISED ANOTHER --
JUST WHAT DID IT DO
TO THE BRAIN?
Woman: I HAD ALWAYS ASSUMED
THAT PEOPLE KNEW HOW
MARIJUANA WORKED.
IT SURPRISED ME,
ACTUALLY, WHEN I BEGAN
LOOKING IN THE RESEARCH
LITERATURE, THAT --
THAT IT WAS REALLY CLEAR
THAT NO ONE REALLY
KNEW HOW IT WORKED.
McDormand: IN 1988, ALLYN
HOWLETT FOUND THE ANSWER.
SHE DISCOVERED THAT,
DEEP INSIDE THE BRAIN,
THC MOLECULES ACTIVATE A
PREVIOUSLY UNKNOWN NETWORK
OF SPECIALIZED
CHEMICAL RECEPTORS.
Man: SO THAT WAS
PROOF THAT THERE IS
A RECEPTOR PROTEIN IN THE BRAIN
THAT COMBINED TO THE THC
LIKE A KEY IN A LOCK.
IT WAS VERY EXCITING, BECAUSE
WHAT THAT MEANT TO US WAS,
WE HAD A TOOL THAT COULD
BE USED FOR STUDYING,
AND OTHER RESEARCHERS
COULD USE IT, AS WELL.
AND PEOPLE COULD STUDY WHERE
THE RECEPTOR WAS IN THE BRAIN.
McDormand: HOWLETT AND OTHER
SCIENTISTS FOUND THE RECEPTORS
IN THE HIPPOCAMPUS,
WHICH FORMS MEMORIES;
THE CEREBELLUM, WHICH
CONTROLS MOVEMENT;
AND THE FRONTAL
CORTEX, WHERE WE THINK.
Pollan: HERE WERE THESE
RECEPTORS THAT THIS CHEMICAL
PRODUCED BY A PLANT
OUT IN THE WORLD
JUST SO HAPPENED TO HAVE
THE PRECISE
COMBINATION TO UNLOCK.
WHAT AN EXTRAORDINARY
THING THAT IS.
IS THAT WHY THAT RECEPTOR
NETWORK EXISTED,
SO THAT PEOPLE COULD GET HIGH?
WE DON'T HAVE THOSE RECEPTORS
JUST SO THAT PEOPLE CAN
GET HIGH SMOKING POT.
RECEPTORS ARE DEVELOPED
IN NEURONS SO THAT
THEY CAN COMMUNICATE
WITH A CHEMICAL
THAT THE BODY MAKES.
SO THAT WAS THE
LOGIC BEHIND GOING IN
AND TRYING TO EXTRACT
A COMPOUND IN THE BRAIN
THAT WOULD ACT JUST
LIKE MARIJUANA DID.
McDormand: AND IN 1992,
PROOF CAME THAT THE BRAIN
DOES MAKE A COMPOUND
VERY MUCH LIKE THC.
IT WAS DISCOVERED BY NONE
OTHER THAN RAPHAEL MECHOULAM,
WHO NAMED IT ANANDAMIDE.
WE CALL IT THE
BRAIN'S OWN MARIJUANA
BECAUSE THE COMPOUND
THAT IS MADE BY THE
BRAIN -- ANANDAMIDE --
SLEVEL AND CELLULAR LEVEL,
IN TERMS OF AT THE RECEPTOR
THAT THC HAS.
McDormand: IT TURNS OUT
THAT WHEN ANANDAMIDE
IS RELEASED IN THE
BRAIN, LIKE MARIJUANA,
IT AFFECTS SUCH BASIC THINGS
AS APPETITE, PAIN, AND MEMORY.
AND IT PLAYS A CRITICAL ROLE
IN A SOMETIMES UNDERAPPRECIATED
MENTAL FUNCTION --
FORGETTING.
Pollan: WHEN I
FIRST HEARD THAT,
IT DIDN'T SEEM ADAPTIVE TO ME,
TO HAVE A DRUG FOR FORGETTING.
MEMORY, WE UNDERSTAND, HAS
GREAT SURVIVAL UTILITY.
YOU KNOW, YOU LEARN THAT
THAT'S A POISONOUS MUSHROOM
OR THAT'S A DANGEROUS ANIMAL,
AND YOU STAY AWAY AND
YOU REMEMBER THAT.
BUT WHY WOULD
FORGETTING BE ADAPTIVE?
AND I ASKED MECHOULAM
THIS QUESTION.
AND HE SAID, WELL, TELL ME,
DO YOU REALLY WANT TO REMEMBER
ALL THE FACES YOU SAW ON
THE SUBWAY THIS MORNING?
FORGETTING WELL IS ALMOST
AS IMPORTANT AS
REMEMBERING WELL.
FORGETTING IS ABOUT EDITING.
IT'S ABOUT TAKING
THE FLOOD, THE OCEAN
OF SENSE INFORMATION
COMING AT YOU
AND FORGETTING EVERYTHING
BUT WHAT'S IMPORTANT.
SO LIFE IS NOT JUST ABOUT
ACCUMULATING NEW MEMORIES.
MEMORY CAN CRIPPLE US, TOO.
[ MAN YELLING ]
Pollan: YOU HAVE SOLDIERS
RETURNING FROM WAR ZONES,
THAT ARE TRAUMATIZED
BY EXPERIENCES
THAT IN EFFECT
THEY CAN'T UNLEARN.
SO IF YOU COULD HELP
THEM UNLEARN THAT --
ESSENTIALLY, A PRODUCTIVE
KIND OF FORGETTING,
EITHER WITH A DRUG OR SOME
OTHER KIND OF REGIME --
THAT WOULD BE INCREDIBLY USEFUL.
McDormand: AND THAT'S EXACTLY
WHAT ARON LICHTMAN
IS TRYING TO DO.
HE'S STUDYING HOW MICE
REMEMBER -- AND FORGET.
FIRST, HE TRAINS THEM TO
FIND AN UNDERWATER PLATFORM.
Man: THE MICE ARE
NATURAL SWIMMERS,
BUT THEY'RE LOOKING
FOR A WAY OUT.
THEY SWIM ALL AROUND THE
PERIMETER OF THE TANK.
THEY'RE SWIMMING,
SWIMMING, SWIMMING.
SOMETIMES THEY BUMP INTO
THE PLATFORM BY MISTAKE
AND THEY CLIMB ONTO IT.
OTHER TIMES, THEY
NEVER FIND IT.
IT'S BEEN AT IT
SOFOR A WHILE.NT,
AND THE EXPERIMENTER HAS
TO GENTLY GUIDE THEM TO IT
McDormand: THEN, LICHTMAN
TAKES THE PLATFORM AWAY.
A NORMAL MOUSE QUICKLY
REALIZES THE PLATFORM IS GONE.
BUT A MOUSE WHOSE ANANDAMIDE
RECEPTORS HAVE BEEN BLOCKED
IS UNABLE TO FORGET.
Lichtman: THEY DON'T
LEARN TO GIVE UP.
THEY KEEP ON LOOKING
FOR THAT PLATFORM,
McDormand: SCIENTISTS
LIKE LICHTMAN HOPE
THAT LEARNING HOW TO REGULATE
ANANDAMIDE MAY ONE DAY
LEAD TO TREATMENTS FOR PEOPLE
WHO ARE HAUNTED
BY THEIR MEMORIES.
Lichtman: IF THEY CAN ELEVATE
NATURALLY OCCURRING
ANANDAMIDE IN HUMANS,
WE MIGHT BE ABLE
TO HAVE WHOLE NEW
THERAPEUTIC TARGETS TO TREAT
POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS SYNDROME.
Mechoulam: BY USING A
PLANT THAT HAS BEEN AROUND
FOR THOUSANDS OF
YEARS, WE DISCOVERED
A NEW PHYSIOLOGICAL SYSTEM
OF IMMENSE IMPORTANCE.
WE WOULDN'T HAVE BEEN
ABLE TO GET THERE
IF WE HAD NOT LOOKED AT A PLANT.
Pollan: THESE PLANTS ARE
CONSTANTLY UNDERGOING
THIS REVISION AND
THIS RE-REVISION
IN OUR CULTURAL IMAGINATION,
DEPENDING ON WHAT USES
THEY'RE PLAYING FOR US.
ARE THEY DEMONS OR ARE
THEY, YOU KNOW, SAVIORS?
WE SEE IT WITH THE APPLE,
WHICH WENT FROM EVIL
TO WHOLESOME TO EVIL.
AND WE SEE IT WITH MARIJUANA,
WHICH ALSO HAS HAD
THESE PERIODS OF
EVIL AND THIS PERIOD
OF BEING CELEBRATED
BY THE COUNTERCULTURE.
IS IT MORE UPLIFTING
OR MORE RELAXING
FOR YOUR BODY THAT YOU'RE AFTER?
UPLIFTING.
McDormand: ONE PLACE
THAT'S WELL KNOWN
FOR CELEBRATING
CANNABIS IS AMSTERDAM.
WE HAVE THE SHIVA,
WHICH IS LOVELY.
McDormand: THOUGH MARIJUANA
IS NOT FULLY LEGAL HERE,
IT CAN BE LEGALLY
SOLD AND SMOKED
IN LICENSED COFFEE SHOPS,
DRAWING TOURISTS FROM
AROUND THE WORLD.
FANTASTIC, LET'S
DO THAT FOR 10.
Pollan: YOU CAN
WALK DOWN THE STREET
AND CATCH THE WHIFF
OF MARIJUANA SMOKE
COMING OUT OF BARS --
CAFES, AS
THEY'RE CALLED --
AND YOU CYOU WANT. EXACTLY
WHAT KIND OF EXPERIENCE
THAT'S MILDER, MORE DREAMY.
I THINK JUST THE BUD.
THANK YOU.
OKAY, BYE.
Pollan: YOU LOOK AT THE
SCENE AND YOU MARVEL AT IT.
IT IS NO DIFFERENT THAN
PEOPLE SITTING AROUND,
ENJOYING THEIR GLASS
OF WINE OR CIGARETTES.
McDormand: AMSTERDAM EVEN
HAS SPECIAL GARDEN SHOPS
FOR CANNABIS GROWERS.
YOU REPOT IT INTO A BIGGER POT.
Man: YOU PUT THIS ONE
STRAIGHT IN THE POT.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO BREAK IT OR --
McDormand: ITS
OWNER, TIM A'COURT,
CAME HERE FROM NEW ZEALAND,
WHERE HIS PASSION
FOR GROWING CANNABIS
HAD RUN HIM AFOUL OF THE LAW.
Man: WE SELL EVERYTHING
FOR THE HOME GROWER HERE,
FROM THE SMALLEST SET-UP
TO REALLY LARGE SET-UPS.
AND INCLUDED IN THAT IS AS
MUCH OF THE HIGH-TECH STUFF
AS WE CAN GIVE.
THIS ONE'S A NUTRIENT MONITOR.
THESE ARE OBVIOUSLY
FOR TWO LIGHTS,
FOR FOUR LIGHTS, FOR SIX
LIGHTS, EIGHT LIGHTS.
THIS GOES RIGHT UP TO 100
LIGHTS, IF YOU SO REQUIRE.
SOMETIMES WE NEED TO HAVE TIMERS
RIGHT DOWN TO THE SECOND.
THIS IS A CAMERA.
AND IT'S THE SAME SORT
OF CAMERA YOU WOULD BUY
FROM THE SPY SHOP FOR SPYING
ON YOUR WIFE OR WHATEVER.
PEOPLE AREN'T COMING IN AND OUT.
ON OUR CROP AND MAKING SURE
Pollan: YOU CAN ALSO BUY SEEDS.
YOU CAN BUY, YOU
KNOW, ALL FEMALE SEEDS
OF ANY GIVEN STRAIN YOU WANT.
THEY'RE OUT THERE
IN LITTLE SIX-PACKS,
JUST LIKE AT YOUR GARDEN
CENTER, SELLING PETUNIAS.
A'Court: I DON'T
THINK THERE WOULD BE
A PLANT ON EARTH THAT
COMES NEAR TO THE AMOUNT
OF EQUIPMENT AND TECHNOLOGY
AVAILABLE TO GROW
IT TO ITS POTENTIAL.
IT'S MORE THAN JUST A HOBBY.
IT'S A WHOLE LIFE'S WORK.
SOME PEOPLE -- THAT
IS THEIR WHOLE LIFE.
THEY'RE SO ENTHUSIASTIC
ABOUT THEIR SO-CALLED HOBBY.
IT'S UNEXPLAINABLE.
IT'S NOT JUST SOMETHING
ABOUT DRUGS OR MONEY,
BUT THERE REALLY IS
A DEEP FASCINATION
WITH THE MARIJUANA PLANT.
Pollan: THE WAY I SEE PLANTS,
THEY'RE JUST AS
ADVANCED AS WE ARE,
FROM AN EVOLUTIONARY
POINT OF VIEW.
WHILE WE WERE WORKING ON
CONSCIOUSNESS,
LANGUAGE, TOOL-MAKING,
ALL THESE THINGS WE JUDGE TO
BE SO WONDERFUL AND IMPORTANT,
THEY WERE WORKING
ON DIFFERENT TOOLS.
AND THEIR TOOLS ARE JUST
AS SOPHISTICATED AS OURS.
THE FACT THAT THIS PLANT,
CANNABIS, FOR EXAMPLE,
CAN ACTUALLY CHANGE THE TEXTURE
OF CONSCIOUSNESS -- YOU KNOW,
THIS IS INGENIOUS.
WE WOULD NOT BE THE SAME,
IF NOT FOR CANNABIS.
AND CANNABIS CERTAINLY
IS VERY DIFFERENT
FOR ITS RELATIONSHIP WITH US.
IT'S ONE OF THE GREAT WINNERS
IN THIS DANCE OF DOMESTICATION.
McDormand: LOOKING DOWN
AT IT FROM THE AIR,
YOU MIGHT NOT GUESS THAT
SOUTHERN IDAHO IS A DESERT.
THE BIG GREEN CIRCLES
ARE CROP FIELDS.
THEY GET THEIR WATER FROM
A VAST IRRIGATION SYSTEM
OF UNDERGROUND PIPES
AND GIANT SPRINKLERS.
THIS IS ONE OF THE MOST
PRODUCTIVE FARM AREAS
IN THE UNITED STATES,
AND ONE OF THE PRINCIPAL SOURCES
OF A FOOD CROP THAT FEEDS
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE --
THE POTATO.
Pollan: THE DESIRE, I
THINK, THAT THE POTATO
HAS EVOLVED TO
GRATIFY, IN LARGE PART,
IS OUR DESIRE FOR CONTROL
-- CONTROL OVER OUR FATE.
IT GIVES US THAT BY PROVIDING
AN IMMENSE AMOUNT
OF FOOD PER ACRE.
AN INDIVIDUAL WITH HALF
AN ACRE OF POTATOES
CAN GROW ENOUGH FOOD
TO KEEP HIMSELF ALIVE
OR HIS FAMILY ALIVE FOR A YEAR.
IT'S KIND OF EXTRAORDINARY.
Man: WHEN YOU LIFT UP THE
SOIL AND YOU SEE THESE
BEAUTIFUL POTATOES
THAT ARE SO NUTRITIOUS
GROWING UNDERNEATH THEM, IT'S
JUST -- IT'S REALLY, YOU KNOW,
EXCITING TO SEE HOW PRODUCTIVE
AND HOW AMAZING THIS CROP IS,
THAT IT CAN TAKE THIS
LITTLE TINY PLANT
AND PRODUCE THIS GREAT FOOD.
Pollan: THE STORY THAT
WE'VE BEEN TELLING SO FAR
IS THE STORY OF THE
SYMBIOTIC RELATIONSHIP
BUT WITH THE POTATO, WE ENTER
INTO A VERY NEW CHAPTER
IN THAT RELATIONSHIP --
THE GENETIC
MODIFICATION OF PLANTS.
FOR THE FIRST
TIME, WE ARE TAKING
GENES FROM ONE DISTANT SPECIES
AND INTRODUCING IT INTO ANOTHER.
THAT REPRESENTS A
REAL QUANTUM CHANGE
IN OUR RELATIONSHIP TO PLANTS.
[ BELL RINGING ]
[ CHILDREN PLAYING ]
McDormand: OUR
RELATIONSHIP TO THE POTATO
BEGAN IN THE ANDES
MOUNTAINS OF SOUTH AMERICA.
IN PLACES LIKE PISAC IN PERU,
PEOPLE HAVE LONG DEPENDED
ON THE POTATO FOR SURVIVAL.
TO MAKE SURE THEY
GROW ENOUGH POTATOES,
THEY'VE DEVELOPED AN
ASTONISHING DEGREE
OF AGRICULTURAL CREATIVITY.
Man: WE RECKON THAT THERE ARE
MORE THAN 5,000
DIFFERENT POTATO VARIETIES
IN THE ANDEAN REGION.
THERE ARE TREMENDOUS
COMBINATIONS
OF COLORS, AS WELL AS SHAPES.
YOU FIND VERY
ELONGATED POTATO TUBERS
THAT DON'T LOOK
POTATOES AT ALL,
TO VERY, VERY STRANGE,
WITH VERY DIFFERENT
PROTUBERANCES,
THAT LOOK VERY,
VERY STRANGE TO YOU.
McDormand: IT WAS IN
THE ANDES THAT PEOPLE
FIRST DOMESTICATED THE POTATO
PLANT AROUND 8,000 YEARS AGO.
TO DO THAT, THEY HAD TO
OVERCOME A BIG OBSTACLE.
Pollan: THE POTATO IN
THE WILD IS POISONOUS.
YOU KNOW, IT'S ONE OF THOSE
CROPS THAT PRODUCES SOLANINE,
WHICH IS AN ALKALOID
WHICH IS POISONOUS.
AND, IN FACT, POTATOES STILL
PRODUCE IT, BY THE WAY.
IF YOU ALLOW YOUR POTATO
TO GET EXPOSED TO LIGHT
AND IT TURNS GREEN, IT'S
PRODUCING SOLANINE,
AND YOU SHOULDN'T EAT IT.
McDormand: BUT IN
THE PLANT WORLD,
THERE ARE ALWAYS
EXCEPTIONS TO THE RULE.
GENES INEVITABLY MUTATE,
AND PLANTS CHANGE.
Pollan: PEOPLE DID A
LOT OF TRIAL AND ERROR,
TASTING POTATOES AND
SPITTING THEM OUT,
AND THEN, EVENTUALLY,
YOU FIND ONE --
LIKE, HEY, THIS ONE
DOESN'T HAVE THAT TASTE.
AND THOSE WOULD BE THE
POTATOES THAT WE WOULD SAVE.
McDormand: OVER TIME,
THE PERUVIANS ACHIEVED
GREAT SUCCESS AS
POTATO FARMERS,
NOT BY TRYING TO
CONTROL NATURE,
BUT BY ADAPTING TO IT.
Pollan: WHENEVER YOU'RE
MOVING UP IN ALTITUDE,
YOU'RE HAVING A RADICAL
CHANGE IN CLIMATE.
AND ONE SIDE OF A HILL WILL HAVE
A VERY DIFFERENT
CLIMATE THAN ANOTHER.
THE WAY THE EARLY
PERUVIANS DEALT WITH THAT
WAS TO GROW MANY DIFFERENT
VARIETIES OF POTATOES
AND PRESERVE THE DIVERSITY,
SO THAT ON A PLOT
OF THIS KIND OF
FACING TOWARD THE SUN
AT THIS KIND OF ALTITUDE,
YOU PLANT THIS ONE.
AND ON THIS PLANT -- JUST ON
THE OTHER SIDE OF THE HILL,
YOU PLANT THIS POTATO.
AND THIS WAS A WAY OF GAINING
CONTROL OVER THEIR FATE.
BECAUSE IF SOMETHING HAPPENED
ON THAT ONE PLOT
AT THAT ALTITUDE,
THEY WOULD STILL
HAVE OTHER POTATOES.
Roca: THE ANDEAN REGION HAS
MANY NICHES FOR GROWING CROPS.
AND THE POTATO WAS ABLE TO
ADAPT TO DIFFERENT AREAS.
THAT'S WHY THERE WERE
SO MANY VARIETIES
DEVELOPED FOR DIFFERENT
USES AND DIFFERENT PURPOSES
ALONG THE ANDES.
McDormand: FAUSTINO PACCO IS 24.
HIS FAMILY HAS BEEN GROWING
POTATOES HERE IN THE ANDES
FOR HUNDREDS OF YEARS.
[ SPEAKING SPANISH ]
[ FLUTE PLAYING ]
[ SPEAKING NATIVE LANGUAGE ]
[ PACCO SPEAKING SPANISH ]
McDormand: THESE ANDEAN
FARMERS ARE THE DESCENDANTS
OF ONE OF THE GREAT
CIVILIZATIONS OF HISTORY --
THE INCAS.
THEY PRESIDED OVER ONE
OF THE MOST SOPHISTICATED
AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS ON EARTH,
BASED IN LARGE
PART ON THE POTATO.
BUT WHEN THE SPANISH
INVADED IN THE 16th CENTURY,
THEY DESTROYED THE INCA EMPIRE
AND SET THE POTATO -- AND
OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH IT --
ON A NEW PHASE OF ITS JOURNEY.
WHEN THE POTATO GOT TO EUROPE,
IT CHANGED THE COURSE
OF EUROPEAN HISTORY.
[ THUNDERCLAPS ]
Pollan: BEFORE THE POTATO,
THE NORTHERN TIER OF EUROPE
-- THE POPULATION WAS
RELATIVELY SMALL AND WAS
HELD BACK BY REGULAR FAMINES
CAUSED BY FAILURES
OF THE GRAIN HARVEST.
THE FURTHER NORTH YOU GO, THE
DICIER IT IS TO GROW WHEAT.
AND SO THE CENTER OF GRAVITY
IN EUROPE BEFORE THE POTATO
WAS THE MEDITERRANEAN,
WHERE YOU COULD GROW
GRAIN MORE RELIABLY.
THE POTATO DID VERY WELL AT
THE MORE NORTHERLY AREAS.
IT DID VERY WELL
IN WETTER AREAS.
AND IT DID VERY WELL
IN REALLY POOR SOILS.
THIS VAST NEW SOURCE OF
CALORIES THAT COULD UNDERWRITE
THE GROWTH OF THE POPULATION,
SUCH AS NEVER WOULD HAVE
HAPPENED WITHOUT THE POTATO.
SINCE ONE INDIVIDUAL
CAN GROW SO MUCH FOOD,
YOU NEED FEWER
PEOPLE IN THE FIELDS
TO SUPPORT AN URBAN POPULATION.
SO IT'S REALLY HARD TO IMAGINE
THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
PROCEEDING AS IT WOULD
WITHOUT THE POTATO TO
KIND OF SUPPORT IT.
THIS NEW WORLD FOOD
REMADE THE OLD WORLD.
McDormand: THE POTATO
THRIVED IN THE SOILS
OF NORTHERN EUROPE,
MOST DRAMATICALLY IN IRELAND,
A COUNTRY SORELY IN
NEED OF A HEARTY FOOD.
Pollan: FOR THE IRISH,
THE POTATO INITIALLY
WAS A GODSEND.
McDormand: IRELAND'S POOR
FARMLAND AND BAD WEATHER
MADE IT A TOUGH
PLACE TO GROW CROPS.
BUT THE POTATO PLANT
ACTUALLY PROSPERED
IN THIS SOGGY ENVIRONMENT
AND SEEMED TO END THE COUNTRY'S
LONG STRUGGLE WITH HUNGER.
Pollan: IF YOU HAD
POTATOES AND COW'S MILK,
YOU HAD A COMPLETE DIET.
YOU HAD CALORIES, OBVIOUSLY,
AND YOU HAD THE FULL
COMPLEMENT OF VITAMINS.
SO THEY BECAME VERY
DEPENDENT ON THE POTATO.
AND IN FACT, THE
POPULATION GREW.
THE PROBLEM WAS,
HOWEVER, THAT THE IRISH
WERE PLANTING ALMOST EXCLUSIVELY
ONE KIND OF POTATO --
THE POTATO THEY CALLED
THE LUMPER.
AND THEY PLANTED THE
LUMPER ALL OVER IRELAND.
SO THE IRISH HAD
REALLY MADE THEMSELVES
DEPENDENT ON THIS
ONE STRAIN OF POTATO.
AND IN 1845, SOME SHIP
FROM SOUTH AMERICA
WAS CARRYING A FUNGUS,
AND IT WAS A
WIND-SPREAD SPORE,
AND OVER THE COURSE
OF A VERY FEW WEEKS,
THE SPORES SPREAD
ACROSS ALL OF IRELAND,
AND WITHIN DAYS OF INFECTION,
THE FIELDS WENT BLACK
AND THE POTATOES IN THE
GROUND TURNED TO MUSH.
McDormand: THE IRISH POTATO
FAMINE LASTED FOR THREE YEARS.
IN THE END, THE FAMINE
KILLED ONE MILLION PEOPLE --
ONE OUT OF EVERY EIGHT
PEOPLE IN IRELAND.
Pollan: SO THE IRISH
FAMINE IS, IN A WAY,
THE GREAT CAUTIONARY TALE
OF PUTTING ALL YOUR
EGGS IN ONE BASKET,
AND THE GREAT CAUTIONARY TALE
ABOUT MONOCULTURES OF ALL KINDS.
IT'S A PARABLE ABOUT THE
IMPORTANCE OF BIODIVERSITY
AND THE DANGERS OF MONOCULTURE.
AND IT'S A PARABLE WE
FORGET AT OUR PERIL,
BUT, IN FACT, WE'RE IN THE
PROCESS OF FORGETTING TODAY.
McDormand: AND WHAT'S
MAKING US FORGET
IS ONE OF OUR FAVORITE FOODS.
EACH YEAR, AMERICANS CONSUME
ABOUT 7.5 BILLION
POUNDS OF FRENCH FRIES.
THEY ARE THE MOST POPULAR
FAST FOOD IN THE COUNTRY.
Pollan: WE LOVE
OUR FRENCH FRIES.
McDONALD'S KIND OF PIONEERED
THAT BEAUTIFUL RED BOX
THAT HAVE TO BE TALL ENOUGH TO
KIND OF SPROUT OUT OF THE BOX
LIKE A LITTLE BOUQUET
OF POTATO FLOWERS.
McDormand: AND TO MAKE
THOSE LONG FRENCH FRIES,
THE FAST FOOD INDUSTRY RELIES
ALMOST EXCLUSIVELY ON
ONE VARIETY OF POTATO --
THE RUSSET BURBANK.
Pollan: AND THAT'S
WHAT McDONALD'S BUYS,
BECAUSE McDONALD'S WANTS PEOPLE
TO HAVE THE SAME EXPERIENCE --
THE SAME BEAUTIFUL, GOLDEN
McDONALD'S FRENCH FRIES,
WHETHER YOU'RE IN
PRAGUE OR LONDON
OR BEIJING OR NEW YORK OR IDAHO.
McDormand: McDONALD'S
BUYS ITS FRENCH FRIES
FROM POTATO PROCESSING COMPANIES
LIKE THE J.R. SIMPLOT COMPANY.
THIS IS ONE OF ITS
PLANTS, IN NAMPA, IDAHO.
THE POTATO WE PROCESS THE
MOST IS THE RUSSET BURBANK.
THE RUSSET BURBANK
GIVES US PRETTY MUCH
THE IDEAL QUALITY ATTRIBUTES,
IF WE'RE GOING TO CONVERT THEM
INTO THE PRODUCT THAT
OUR CUSTOMER WANTS.
Pollan: SO YOU SEE
HOW MONOCULTURES
ON THE PLATE LEAD TO
MONOCULTURES ON THE LAND,
AND THAT A DESIRE FOR SOMETHING
LIKE THAT PERFECT FRENCH FRY
HAS A WHOLE, YOU KNOW,
CARRIES A WHOLE CHAIN
OF CONSEQUENCES, ALL THE
WAY BACK TO THE FARM.
McDormand: THIS IDAHO FARM,
WHOSE FIELDS EXTEND
FOR NEARLY 100 MILES,
IS RUN BY RYAN CRANNEY
AND HIS FAMILY.
LIKE MOST IDAHO
POTATO FARMERS,
THE CRANNEYS SELL
MOST OF THEIR CROP
TO THE PROCESSING
COMPANIES THAT MAKE
IF YOU WANT TO GET THEM IN
BEFORE THEY GET FROZEN,
THEN WE NEED TO KEEP DIGGING.
McDormand: SO, TO
SATISFY THEIR CUSTOMERS,
THE CRANNEYS GROW MOSTLY
Man: THAT OUGHT TO
MAKE GOOD FRENCH FRIES.
Man: I THINK THERE
ARE OTHER VARIETIES
THAT ARE EASIER TO GROW,
BUT THAT'S WHAT THE CONSUMER
DEMANDS, IS THE RUSSET BURBANK,
AND I'D BE SHOT FOR
SUGGESTING OTHERWISE.
McDormand: DESPITE THE
DEMAND FOR RUSSET BURBANKS,
THE BUSINESS OF GROWING THEM
IS FAR FROM A SURE THING.
EACH YEAR, CRANNEY
AND HIS FAMILY
HAVE TO SHELL OUT
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS
FOR WATER, SEED, FERTILIZER,
CHEMICALS, AND LABOR.
BUT THEY HAVE LITTLE
CONTROL OVER THE PRICE
THEIR POTATOES WILL SELL
FOR AT HARVEST TIME.
Cranney: IT'S VERY
RISKY, GROWING CROPS.
WE HAD SOME REALLY HUGE LOSSES
ECONOMICALLY HERE ON THE FARM.
I DON'T EVEN LIKE TO THINK
ABOUT IT, HOW BAD IT WAS.
A LOT OF THE PEOPLE
IN THE COMMUNITY,
FARMERS THAT WE GREW UP WITH,
THAT HAVE BEEN HERE
AS LONG AS WE HAVE,
NO LONGER HAVE THEIR OPERATIONS.
MANY OF US, THE ONLY
WAY WE COULD SURVIVE WAS
TO RE-MORTGAGE OUR FARMS
AND RE-MORTGAGE OUR LAND,
AND THAT'S HOW WE
STAYED IN BUSINESS.
YOU CAN ONLY DO --
DIP INTO THE WELL
FOR SO LONG UNTIL
THE WELL GOES DRY.
AND MANY OF US HAVE
BEEN TO THAT POINT.
WELL, IT'S NOT TOO BAD HERE,
BECAUSE YOU'RE
RUNNING ENOUGH VOLUME.
THEY'RE FLOWING
PRETTY GOOD, BUT...
McDormand: IN ADDITION TO THE
ECONOMIC PERILS HE FACES,
CRANNEY MUST CONTEND WITH
BIOLOGICAL ADVERSARIES --
THE INSECTS, FUNGI, AND VIRUSES
THAT PREY ON HIS PLANTS.
AND HIS RUSSET BURBANKS
ARE ESPECIALLY VULNERABLE,
BECAUSE THEY ARE GROWN
IN A MONOCULTURE,
JUST LIKE THE LUMPER POTATOES
WERE, BACK IN IRELAND.
IF AN ENEMY CAN KILL ONE OF
CRANNEY'S RUSSET BURBANKS,
IT CAN KILL THEM ALL.
MY ROLE AS A FARMER
IS TO HELP THE PLANT
OUT-COMPETE THE
DIFFERENT PESTS,
WHETHER THAT BE WEEDS OR
WHETHER THAT BE INSECTS
OR A FUNGUS OF SOME SORT.
IT'S A CONSTANT BATTLE THAT
WE HAVE TO FIGHT THOSE OFF
AND TO PROTECT AGAINST THOSE.
IT'S A RACE TO THE FINISH
LINE, WHETHER THE PESTS WIN
OR WHETHER THE
POTATO PLANT WINS.
McDormand: TO HELP HIS
POTATOES WIN THAT RACE,
CRANNEY, LIKE THE
GREAT MAJORITY
OF LARGE-SCALE POTATO GROWERS
IN THE UNITED STATES,
USES CHEMICAL PESTICIDES.
THE CHEMICALS THE
CRANNEYS USE CAN BE TOXIC,
BUT THEY FOLLOW EPA GUIDELINES
THAT ESTABLISH LEVELS
THAT ARE CONSIDERED
SAFE TO USE.
Cranney: I DON'T
NECESSARILY LIKE TO APPLY
THE INSECTICIDES -- OR ANY
CHEMICAL OF ANY SORT --
BUT IT'S SOMETHING
THAT NEEDS TO BE DONE
IN ORDER TO KEEP
THE PLANTS HEALTHY.
Man: WE DON'T USE A
CHEMICAL UNLESS WE NEED TO,
AND IT'S KIND OF BY
PRESCRIPTION, BY FIELD.
SO YOU JUST DON'T GO
IN AND JUST BLANKET
EXCESSIVE AMOUNTS OF
CHEMICALS AND FUNGICIDES ON.
IF THAT POTATO DOESN'T NEED
ANY, WE WON'T APPLY IT.
IF IT DOES, WE DO.
YOU KNOW, WE LOVE
OUR CHILDREN, TOO.
AND WE DON'T WANT TO PUT
ANYTHING ON THE FOOD
THAT WE EAT ANY MORE
-- TO TAINT IT FOR US,
ANY MORE THAN YOU.
Pollan: YOU KNOW, THE CONTROL
OF NATURE IS EXPENSIVE.
TO SPRAY ALL THOSE PESTICIDES,
TO HAVE 10 SPRAYINGS
OF FERTILIZER OVER A
COURSE OF THE SEASON,
TO WATER, TO BUY ALL THAT
WATER AND PUMP ALL THAT WATER,
THESE FARMERS ARE REALLY LIVING
ON, ON VERY THIN MARGINS
AND VERY LITTLE ROOM FOR ERROR.
AND, YOU KNOW,
IT'S EASY FOR US
TO SIT HERE AND CRITICIZE
THEM FOR SPRAYING
THESE CHEMICALS ON OUR
FOOD, BUT THE FACT IS,
IF THEY WERE TO GIVE UP
ON A SINGLE SPRAYING,
McDormand: IN 1995, RYAN
CRANNEY AND FARMERS LIKE HIM
WELCOMED THE NEWS OF AN
AGRICULTURAL BREAKTHROUGH
THAT PROMISED TO CUT
DOWN THEIR USE OF SPRAYS.
MONSANTO, THE WORLD'S BIGGEST
BIOTECHNOLOGY COMPANY,
CAME UP WITH A MUCH
LESS TOXIC METHOD
FOR KILLING ONE OF THE POTATO'S
MOST DEADLY ENEMIES --
THE COLORADO POTATO BEETLE,
WHICH CAN PICK THE
LEAVES OFF A PLANT
VIRTUALLY OVERNIGHT.
Thornton: COLORADO
POTATO BEETLE,
WORLDWIDE, IS PROBABLY
THE MOST SERIOUS INSECT
PEST IN POTATOES.
WE STILL ESTIMATE
THAT, YOU KNOW,
AND PROBABLY ACROSS
THE U.S. AS A WHOLE,
ABOUT 40% OF THE INSECTICIDES
THAT WERE APPLIED
WERE APPLIED FOR COLORADO
POTATO BEETLE CONTROL.
McDormand: MONSANTO'S
INNOVATION WAS TO CREATE
A NEW KIND OF POTATO,
CALLED THE NewLeaf POTATO.
IT WAS THE FIRST POTATO TO
BE GENETICALLY ENGINEERED
TO CONTAIN GENES FROM A
DIFFERENT BIOLOGICAL SPECIES.
Woman: GENETIC ENGINEERING IS
A RADICALLY NEW TECHNOLOGY,
COMPARED TO
TRADITIONAL BREEDING.
IT ALLOWS US TO MOVE GENES
WITHOUT REGARD TO
SPECIES BARRIERS.
IT ALLOWS US TO MOVE A
GENE FROM A BUTTERFLY,
YOU KNOW, INTO A CORN PLANT,
FROM A STARFISH
INTO A WHEAT PLANT.
McDormand: MONSANTO'S
NewLeaf POTATO USED A GENE
FROM A COMMON SOIL BACTERIUM,
ONE THAT MAKES A PROTEIN
THAT KILLS POTATO BEETLES
WITHOUT CAUSING HARM TO HUMANS.
THE BACTERIUM IS CALLED
BACILLUS THURINGIENSIS,
OR Bt FOR SHORT.
TO HELP MARKET ITS Bt POTATO,
MONSANTO HIRED PLANT
PHYSIOLOGIST MICHAEL THORNTON
TO BE ONE OF ITS LIAISONS
TO FARMERS IN IDAHO.
Thornton: MONSANTO
WAS ABLE TO IDENTIFY
THE GENE IN THAT
BACTERIUM, THE Bt GENE
THAT WAS RESPONSIBLE FOR
PRODUCTION OF THAT PROTEIN.
AND THEY COULD USE A
PROCESS TO INSERT THAT GENE
INTO A POTATO VARIETY,
ONE THAT GROWERS
WERE ALREADY FAMILIAR WITH.
THE BEETLE EATS THAT LEAF
AND GETS THAT Bt
PROTEIN INSIDE IT
AND IT DISRUPTS ITS
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM,
AND THAT EVENTUALLY KILLS
THE COLORADO POTATO BEETLE.
I CAME FROM THE STANDPOINT THAT
TECHNOLOGY AND NEW IMPROVEMENTS
WERE A GOOD THING FOR
THE POTATO INDUSTRY,
SO I WAS VERY EXCITED TO
SEE SOMETHING THAT WAS
KIND OF A QUANTUM LEAP IN
TECHNOLOGY FOR THE INDUSTRY
BE INTRODUCED.
Pollan: THE PROMISE HERE WAS
THAT YOU COULD
DIMINISH SPRAYING.
YOU MIGHT PAY A LITTLE BIT
MORE FOR THESE POTATOES,
BUT SINCE THEY GENERATED
THEIR OWN PESTICIDE,
YOU COULD GIVE UP SOME
OF YOUR SPRAYINGS.
AND THIS WAS VERY ATTRACTIVE
TO A LOT OF POTATO FARMERS.
AND THOUGHT THAT IT WAS
REALLY GOING TO TAKE OFF.
McDormand: IN 1996, THE NewLeaf
POTATO BEGAN MAKING ITS WAY
INTO FAST FOOD CHAINS
AND SUPERMARKETS.
AS TIME WENT BY,
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
WERE EATING THE GENETICALLY
MODIFIED POTATOES,
BUT HARDLY ANY OF
THEM REALIZED IT,
BECAUSE THE GOVERNMENT HAD RULED
THE POTATOES DIDN'T
NEED TO BE LABELED.
Pollan: I REALIZED AS
I DID MY REPORTING,
I'D BEEN IN A McDONALD'S.
I'D BOUGHT FRITO-LAY CHIPS.
AND THE THING I LEARNED
THAT I HADN'T BEEN AWARE OF,
BECAUSE WE HADN'T BEEN
TOLD, IS THAT WE AMERICANS
HAD BEEN EATING THESE POTATOES
ALREADY FOR A COUPLE OF YEARS.
Thornton: THE POTATO WAS
THE SAME, NUTRITIONALLY,
HAD THE SAME LEVEL OF
VITAMINS, THINGS LIKE THAT.
IT JUST HAD THIS ONE
ADDITIONAL GENE THAT CODES
FOR A PROTEIN THAT MAKES UP LESS
THAN A TENTH OF ONE-PERCENT
OF THE TOTAL PROTEIN
IN THE PLANT.
AND THE DECISION BY
THE FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION WAS THAT,
UNLESS IT'S SUBSTANTIALLY
DIFFERENT --
UNLESS YOU'VE CHANGED
THE NUTRIENT PROFILE --
IT DOES NOT NEED TO BE LABELED.
NOW, IT SEEMS TO
ME THAT THE POTATO
NEVER BEFORE PRODUCED
THIS PESTICIDE.
SO TO SAY THAT POTATOES
PRODUCING PESTICIDE
ARE SUBSTANTIALLY EQUIVALENT
TO POTATOES THAT DON'T
SEEMS TO INVOLVE A CERTAIN
SUSPENSION OF DISBELIEF.
HEY, HEY! HO, HO!
WE DON'T WANT NO
GMOs! HEY, HEY!
McDormand: IN THE LATE
1990s, AS THE NewLeaf
WAS MAKING INROADS
INTO THE MARKET,
THE ISSUE OF GENETICALLY
MODIFIED ORGANISMS, OR GMOs,
WAS AROUSING INTENSE
OPPOSITION ALL OVER THE WORLD.
WE DON'T WANT NO GMO!
HEY, HEY! HO, HO!
Man: I WANT TO KNOW
WHAT'S GOING ON
IN MY BODY AND MY
DAUGHTER'S BODY
WHEN THEY FEED CORN TO -- TO US
THAT'S BEEN GENETICALLY ALTERED.
THEY DON'T KNOW.
THEY CAN'T TELL YOU.
WHAT DO WE WANT? SAFE FOOD!
WHEN DO WE WANT IT? NOW!
Mellon: THE Bt
POTATO OFFERS FARMERS
REDUCED COST.
IT DOESN'T OFFER
CONSUMERS ANYTHING.
AND SO A LOT OF CONSUMERS,
IF THEY WERE GIVEN A CHOICE,
MIGHT SAY, WELL, IT DOESN'T
PROVIDE AN ADVANTAGE FOR ME.
AND THEREFORE, NOT KNOWING
A WHOLE LOT ABOUT IT,
I MIGHT -- I MIGHT
SIMPLY SAY NO.
Pollan: I DO KNOW
McDONALD'S WAS GETTING
A CERTAIN NUMBER OF CALLS
AND LETTERS ASKING THEM,
IS IT TRUE THAT YOU
ARE SERVING GENETICALLY
MODIFIED POTATOES?
THIS IS A COMPANY, LIKE
MANY FOOD COMPANIES,
EXQUISITELY SENSITIVE
TO PUBLIC OPINION.
AND THEY PROBABLY
SAW A POTENTIAL
PRUIN MONSANTO'S BUSINESS,
THEY DIDN'T WANT TO, YOU KNOW,
BUT THEY VERY QUIETLY SAID
THAT AFTER THE FOLLOWING YEAR,
THEY WOULD NO LONGER
BE TAKING THEM.
AND WITH THAT, THE
NewLeaf POTATO WAS OVER.
McDormand: IN 2001,
MONSANTO STOPPED SELLING
THE NewLeaf POTATO.
IT HAD CAPTURED ONLY
ABOUT 5% OF THE MARKET.
BOTH McDONALD'S AND MONSANTO
DECLINED TO BE INTERVIEWED
FOR THIS PROGRAM.
Thornton: I WAS VERY
DISAPPOINTED -- TO SEE
THIS WHOLE DREAM JUST
KIND OF BEING SHUT DOWN
OVER RELATIVELY A
SHORT PERIOD OF TIME
SEEMED TO ME TO BE A TRAGEDY.
I DON'T THINK IT WAS A TRAGEDY.
I THINK IT WAS PART
OF A VERY LARGE DEBATE
ABOUT HOW OUR SOCIETY
OUGHT TO RESPOND TO THE USE
OF A RADICALLY NEW TECHNOLOGY
LIKE GENETIC ENGINEERING
McDormand: BUT SINCE THE
DEMISE OF THE Bt POTATO,
MONSANTO HAS BEEN
VERY SUCCESSFUL
SELLING OTHER GENETICALLY
ENGINEERED CROPS --
LIKE CORN, SOYBEANS,
AND COTTON.
ENTOMOLOGIST BRUCE
TABASHNIK HAS BEEN STUDYING
THE Bt COTTON CROP IN ARIZONA.
Man: WE'RE IN A SPECIAL
SITUATION IN ARIZONA RIGHT NOW
WHERE ABOUT 98% OF THE
COTTON GROWN IS Bt COTTON.
IT'S BEING USED AS PART
OF A PROGRAM TO ERADICATE,
OR AT LEAST GREATLY
SUPPRESS, PINK BOLLWORM.
McDormand: THE BOLLWORM
IS AS DANGEROUS
TO THE COTTON CROP AS
THE COLORADO BEETLE
IS TO POTATOES.
WE HAVE LOTS OF DAMAGE
INSIDE THE BOLL HERE.
ONE OR MORE CATERPILLARS
HAS BEEN FEEDING
ON THE SEEDS INSIDE THE BOLL,
WHICH IS GREAT
FOR THE INSECTS,
BUT NOT GOOD FOR THE
PLANT OR FOR THE FARMER.
McDormand: TABASHNIK
HAS BEEN INVESTIGATING
ONE OF THE MAJOR CONCERNS
ABOUT Bt CROPS --
THE DEGREE TO WHICH
INSECTS EVOLVE RESISTANCE
TO THE BUG-KILLING PROTEIN.
SOME OF HIS WORK IS PARTLY
FUNDED BY MONSANTO,
WHICH IS LEGALLY REQUIRED
TO MONITOR Bt RESISTANCE.
FOR YEARS, ORGANIC FARMERS
HAVE CONTROLLED PESTS
WITH A SPRAY FORM OF Bt.
BUT NOW THAT Bt
HAS BEEN ENGINEERED
INTO CROPS, EXPOSING
INSECTS DAY IN AND DAY OUT,
TABASHNIK HAS
FOUND THAT THE BUGS
ARE MORE LIKELY TO
DEVELOP RESISTANCE.
Tabashnik: IN THE DECADES OF USE
OF Bt SPRAYS, THERE'S ONLY ONE
INSECT THAT EVOLVED RESISTANCE.
ON THE OTHER HAND, AFTER ABOUT
A DOZEN YEARS OF Bt CROPS,
WE ALREADY HAVE THREE EXAMPLES
OF INSECTS THAT HAVE
EVOLVED RESISTANCE.
McDormand: BUT
TABASHNIK STILL THINKS
GENETICALLY ENGINEERED CROPS
DO MORE TO HELP THE
ENVIRONMENT THAN TO HARM IT.
Tabashnik: I THINK
THAT ULTIMATELY
YOU CAN'T BE ABSOLUTELY SURE
THAT NO HARM WILL COME,
BUT WHEN YOU'RE
USING Bt CROPS,
THE BENEFITS ARE REDUCED
INSECTICIDE USE.
THE RISKS ARE MUCH MORE
DIFFICULT TO QUANTIFY
AND MUCH MORE UNCERTAIN.
Ryan: IN MY OWN MIND, IT
SEEMS LIKE IT MAKES SENSE
THAT WE COULD GO TO MORE
GENETICALLY MODIFIED
THAT WOULD ALLOW US NOT
TO APPLY THESE CHEMICALS
ON THE PLANTS,
AND THEY WOULD HAVE A NATURAL
RESISTANCE TO THESE INSECTS.
IT SEEMS LIKE THE
LOGICAL WAY TO GO FOR ME,
AND I ASSUME SOMEDAY
IT WILL GO THERE.
McDormand: BUT FOR FOOD
CROPS LIKE THE POTATO,
GENETIC ENGINEERING
AND CHEMICAL PESTICIDES
ARE NOT THE ONLY CHOICES.
Pollan: YOU KNOW, AS LONG AS
YOU'RE GROWING MONOCULTURES,
YOU SORT OF HAVE
TO CHOOSE BETWEEN
LOTS OF PESTICIDES
TO KEEP THEM GOING,
OR GENETICALLY MODIFIED
CROPS TO KEEP THEM GOING.
BUT IF YOU'RE WILLING
TO ABANDON MONOCULTURE,
THERE ARE OTHER WAYS TO DO IT.
McDormand: MIKE HEATH, WHO
GROWS POTATOES IN IDAHO
JUST 60 MILES
FROM THE CRANNEYS,
IS AN ORGANIC FARMER.
Man: IN A CONVENTIONAL SYSTEM,
YOU'RE TRYING TO CONTROL.
YOU'RE TRYING TO CONTROL NATURE.
WE'RE TRYING TO WORK
WITH IT AS BEST WE CAN.
McDormand: WHILE HIS NEIGHBORS
DEVOTE MOST OF THEIR ACREAGE
TO THE RUSSET
BURBANK, HEATH IS
MORE OF AN
EQUAL-OPPORTUNITY GROWER.
Heath: WE HAVE 16 VARIETIES
ALTOGETHER THIS YEAR.
SO WE'RE PRETTY DIVERSIFIED.
THAT'S OUR MAIN STRENGTH,
IS OUR DIVERSIFICATION.
McDormand: HEATH
GROWS NORKOTAHS,
RED NORLANDS, ALL
BLUES, AND ELBAS.
BY PLANTING LOTS OF
DIFFERENT VARIETIES
AND CONTROLLING PESTS WITH
NATURAL ENEMIES LIKE LADYBUGS,
HE FARMS WITHOUT
USING TOXIC CHEMICALS.
Heath: THE CONVENTIONAL
FARMERS CERTAINLY
KNOW HOW TO FARM WITH CHEMICALS.
I -- I MYSELF, IF I
HAD TO GO BACK TO THAT,
I'D -- I WOULD QUIT.
McDormand: HEATH'S
LABOR COSTS ARE HIGH.
HE DOESN'T CULTIVATE
AS MANY ACRES
OR GROW AS MUCH FOOD
AS THE CRANNEYS.
BUT SINCE HE SPENDS NEXT
TO NOTHING ON PESTICIDES
AND GETS GOOD PRICES
FOR HIS ORGANIC POTATOES
IN SPECIALTY MARKETS,
HE USUALLY EARNS
MORE MONEY PER ACRE.
Heath: I USED TO BE
REALLY PRETTY STUPID,
YOU KNOW, AS
FAR AS MY NEIGHBORS WERE
CONCERNED, PRETTY SILLY.
BUT I HAVE A LOT
MORE RESPECT NOW
THAN I DID 10, 15 YEARS AGO.
THEY CAN SEE THAT I'M
STILL IN BUSINESS,
AND WE'VE GOT GOOD MARKETS,
AND WE GROW A GOOD PRODUCT,
AND I'M PROUD TO BE
AN ORGANIC FARMER.
Pollan: YOU KNOW, THERE ARE
OTHER WAYS TO SKIN A CAT.
AND FARMERS ARE FIGURING IT OUT.
AND THEY'RE FIGURING OUT
HOW TO GROW FOOD
WITHOUT PESTICIDES,
AND THE KEY -- THE KEY
INSIGHT THAT YOU FIND
IN ALL THE CREATIVE FARMERS
WHO HAVE SOLVED THIS PROBLEM
IS GETTING AWAY
FROM MONOCULTURE.
THE ANSWER TO THE
PROBLEMS OF MONOCULTURE
IS NOT NEW TECHNOLOGIES,
IT'S NOT BAND-AIDS.
IT'S GETTING AWAY
FROM MONOCULTURE.
Mellon: I THINK
IF WE COULD LEARN
FROM THE PERUVIANS,
IF WE COULD STEP BACK
AND APPRECIATE THE DIVERSITY
THAT THEY'VE GIVEN US
IN THE POTATO
AND TAKE ADVANTAGE OF
IT IN OUR AGRICULTURE,
THAT IS THE WAY FORWARD.
Thornton: I THINK
SOME OF THE METHODS
THEY'VE DEVELOPED IN PERU
TO USE GENETIC DIVERSITY
BY PLANTING A WHOLE RANGE OF
VARIETIES WITHIN ONE FIELD
IS A VERY GOOD STRATEGY,
BUT I JUST DON'T SEE HOW
WE READILY ADAPT THAT
TO A PRODUCTION
SYSTEM THAT NOT ONLY
HAS TO FEED PEOPLE
IN THE U.S.,
BUT FEED A WORLDWIDE POPULATION
WITH A PRODUCT THAT'S
A CERTAIN QUALITY.
Pollan: THE ORDER
WE IMPOSE ON NATURE
IS NEVER MORE THAN
TEMPORARY OR ILLUSORY.
IN THE END, THE LOGIC
OF NATURE WILL WIN OUT
OVER THE LOGIC OF CAPITALISM,
THE LOGIC OF THE FACTORY,
IT'S ALWAYS BEEN SO AND
IT ALWAYS WILL BE SO.
NATURE IS STRONGER THAN
ANY OF OUR DESIGNS.
AND NATURE RESISTS OUR CONTROL.
FOR ME, THE MOST
IMPORTANT LESSONS
TO TAKE AWAY FROM THESE TALES
IS THAT WE ARE NOT SIMPLY
STANDING OUTSIDE
THE WEB OF LIFE,
BUT THAT WE ARE PART
OF THAT WEB OF LIFE
AND THAT EVERYTHING WE DO --
WHAT WE CHOOSE TO EAT,
WHAT FLOWERS WE CHOOSE
TO PUT ON OUR TABLES,
WHAT DRUGS WE CHOOSE TO TAKE --
THESE ARE EVOLUTIONARY VOTES
WE ARE CASTING EVERY DAY IN
MANY, MANY DIFFERENT WAYS.
WHEN WE USE THESE
METAPHORS AND WE TALK
ABOUT PLANTS HAVING
A STRATEGY TO DO THIS
OR WANTING THIS
OR DESIRING THIS,
WE'RE BEING
METAPHORICAL, OBVIOUSLY.
I MEAN, PLANTS DO NOT
HAVE CONSCIOUSNESS.
BUT THIS IS A FAULT
OF OUR OWN VOCABULARY.
WE DON'T HAVE A VERY GOOD
VOCABULARY TO DESCRIBE
WHAT OTHER SPECIES DO TO US
-- BECAUSE WE THINK WE'RE
THE ONLY SPECIES THAT
REALLY DOES ANYTHING.
BUT TO THE EXTENT THAT
YOU CAN PUT YOURSELF
IN THE PLACE OF
THESE OTHER SPECIES
AND LOOK AT THE WORLD
FROM THEIR POINT OF VIEW,
I THINK IT FREES
US FROM OUR SENSE OF
ALIENATION FROM NATURE,
AND WE BECOME MEMBERS
OF THE BIOTIC COMMUNITY,
ONE AMONG MANY SPECIES,
ALL OF THEM TOGETHER
CREATING THIS WONDROUS
WEB THAT WE CALL LIFE.
EX
EXPL
EXPLOR
EXPLORE
EXPLORE T
EXPLORE THE
EXPLORE THE B
EXPLORE THE BOT
EXPLORE THE BOTAN
EXPLORE THE BOTANY
EXPLORE THE BOTANY OF
EXPLORE THE BOTANY OF D
EXPLORE THE BOTANY OF DES
EXPLORE THE BOTANY OF DESIR
EXPLORE THE
BOTANY OF DESIRE
EXPLORE THE BOTANY
OF DESIRE ON
OF DESIRE ONLI
EXPLORE THE BOTANY
OF DESIRE ONLINE
OF DESIRE ONLINE A
EXPLORE THE BOTANY
OF DESIRE ONLINE AT
EXPLORE THE BOTANY OF
DESIRE ONLINE AT pb
DESIRE ONLINE AT pbs.
EXPLORE THE BOTANY OF
DESIRE ONLINE AT pbs.or
DESIRE ONLINE AT pbs.org.
SEE MORE OF MICHAEL
POLLAN'S INTERVIEW,
WATCH ADDITIONAL VIDEO,
AND GET BETTER ACQUAINTED
WITH THE PLANT'S POINT OF VIEW.
IS PROVIDED BY THE NATIONAL
SCIENCE FOUNDATION,
WHERE DISCOVERIES BEGIN.
ADDITIONAL FUNDING
IS PROVIDED BY
THE ALFRED P.
SLOAN FOUNDATION,
TO ENHANCE PUBLIC UNDERSTANDING
OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
IN THE MODERN WORLD.
AND BY THE COLUMBIA
FOUNDATION, SAN FRANCISCO,
WHICH SUPPORTS THE TRANSITION
TO SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES.
AND BY CONTRIBUTIONS
TO YOUR LOCAL STATION
BY VIEWERS LIKE YOU.
WE ARE PBS.